
The Sources of Evil
How can we fight unhappiness? By struggling with ourselves, for
unhappiness comes from within, not from without. If we could
constantly remind ourselves that everything is nothing but a re-
flection in our consciousness, more or less sharp, depending on
the acuity of our senses, we could then attain a state of lucidity in
which reality would resume its true proportions. We cannot as-
pire to happiness, only to less unhappiness.
To live in despair is a mark of great endurance, whereas to
grow dull and stupid after a great unhappiness is a mark of
deficiency. Self-control and sustained inner effort are required in
order to diminish unhappiness. All efforts to attain happiness, on
the other hand, are entirely futile. You cannot retrace your steps
once you've taken the path to unhappiness; it is the path
of no return. From being happy, one can become unhappy, so
there are more unpleasant surprises in happiness than in unhap-
piness. The world seems right to us when we are happy; when
unhappy, we wish the world were anything but what it is.
Though fully aware that the source of unhappiness is in us, we
nevertheless turn a personal defect into a metaphysical defi-
ciency.
Unhappiness will never be sufficiently generous to acknowl-
edge its own darkness in the world. Substituting for our subjec-
tive plight an objective one, we hope to lighten our burden and
avoid the reproaches which we should in fact address to our-
selves. But such objectification actually deepens our unhappi-
The Sources of Evil
ness and, presenting it as cosmic fatality, shuts off any possibility
of lessening it or of making it more bearable.
The discipline of unhappiness causes less anxiety and fewer
painful surprises; it abates agony and confines suffering. It is a
disguise for an inner drama, the discreet mask of agony.
Beauty's Magic Tricks
Man's sensitivity to beauty grows as he gets closer to happiness.
In beauty, all things find their justification, their raison d'être. We
conceive a beautiful thing such as it is. A painting or a landscape
delights us to such an extent that we can not imagine them in any
other way but what they are. To place the world under the sign of
beauty is to assert that it is as it should be. Then all is glorious
harmony, and even the negative aspects of existence do nothing
but increase its glory and its charm. Beauty will not bring us sal-
vation, but it will bring us closer to happiness. In a world of anti-
nomies, can beauty be spared? Its specific nature and attraction
lie in the fact that it is paradoxical only from an objective point of
view. The esthetic expresses this paradox: to represent the absolute
through form, to give infinity objective, finite shape. The absolute-
in-the-form, that is, embodied in limited expressions, reveals it-
self only to him who is overcome by esthetic emotion; from any
other point of view it is a contradictio in adjecto. For this reason,
there is an incalculable amount of illusion in any ideal of beauty.
But even worse is the fact that the fundamental premise of any
ideal beauty—that the world is the way it should be—does not
hold up under investigation. The world could be any way except
the way it is.
Man's Inconsistency
Why do men insist on achieving something? Would it not be better
if they stood still under the sun in calm and silent immobility?
What is there to accomplish? Why so much effort and ambition?
Man has forgotten the meaning of silence. Although conscious-
ness is the offspring of a vital deficiency, it is not a cause for
inadaptability in every individual; in some it has, on the contrary,
produced an exacerbation of their vital instincts. Unable to live in
the present, man amasses things which weigh and subjugate
him; the feeling of the future is a calamity to him. Consciousness
has divided men into two categories, equally unbalanced and
unhappy: those bent on interiorization, self-torment, and trag-
edy, and those possessed by the imperialistic urger to acquire and
to own. Consciousness made animal, man, and man, demon, but it
has never made anyone God, no matter how proud the world is to
have killed one on the cross.
Shun men impervious to vice, for their insipidity is tiresome.
For what would their conversation be about if not morality?
Whoever has not ventured beyond morality has not fully explored
life's opportunities and has never transfigured his sins. Genuine
existence begins where morality ends; only after that can it ex-
periment with everything, risk everything, even if obstacles block
the road to achievement. Only through innumerable transfigura-
tions can one reach the region where all is permitted, where the
soul can fling itself without remorse into vulgarity, sublimity, or
grotesqueness to such an extent that no direction or form of life
remains unexplored. The tyranny governing ordinary existence
vanishes and is replaced by the absolute spontaneity of unique
Man's Inconsistency
existence, which carries its own law in itself. Could morality still
serve such a being—probably the most generous because also
the most absurd, capable of renouncing the whole world, and
consequently giving away all that can be given? Generosity is in-
compatible with morality, that rationalization of customs, that
mechanization of life. Any generous act is absurd, a renunciation
unheard of in the ordinary man, who drapes himself in morality
in order to hide his vulgar nullity. All that is truly moral begins
when we have done with morality. The pettiness of its laws is
never more evident than in its condemnation of vice, the expres-
sion of carnal tragedy born from the presence of the spirit in the
flesh. Vice is the tragedy of the flesh, the flesh bursting out of its
own fatality, attempting to break the shackles imprisoning its
passionate impulses. An organic weariness drives the nerves and
the flesh to a despair that only an exploration of all forms of plea-
sure can alleviate. In vice, the attraction of the abnormal creates a
troubling anxiety: the spirit seems to have become blood and stirs
in the flesh like an immanent force. Exploration of the possible
cannot take place without the participation of the spirit. Vice is
the triumph of the individual; how could flesh represent the indi-
vidual without outside intervention? The mingling of flesh and
spirit, blood and consciousness, creates an extremely rich effer-
vescence for the man ensnared by vice. Nothing is worse than
vice which is learned, aped, or borrowed; thus a rational extenu-
ation of vice is unjustified: at best, one must single out its fecun-
dity for those who know how to transfigure it, who can deviate
its deviation. To practice it in criminal and vulgar ways is to ex-
ploit its scandalous materiality and ignore the immaterial frisson
which constitutes its excellence. To attain certain heights, inti-
macy cannot dispense with the anxieties of vice. No man of vice
can be condemned unless he ceases to look upon vice as a pretext
and turns it into a goal.
Capitulation
How does one become a pessimist? An organic fatality, rising
from deep inner turmoil and without any external stimulus,
causes incessant depressions which stifle the elan, attacking life
at its roots. It is wrong to surmise that a pessimist has an organic
deficiency or weak vital instincts. In fact, none but those who
love life passionately, though maybe unconsciously, become
pessimists. The devitalizing process takes place later, as a conse-
quence of depressions, for only in passionate, visionary men do
depressions have such capacity for erosion that they devour life
as waves swallow up the shore. In the weak man, depressions
cause neither tension, crises, nor excess; they lead to apathy and
slow death. The pessimist represents an organic paradox whose
insurmountable contradictions generate an intense efferves-
cence. Is not this combination of frequent depressions with
equally frequent elans a paradoxical situation? It goes without
saying that depressions weaken and exhaust vitality, for depres-
sions are assaults on life. There is no efficient way to fight them:
they can subside temporarily through intense work and amuse-
ments. Only one endowed with restless vitality is susceptible
to pessimism. You become a pessimist—a demonic, elemental,
bestial pessimist—only when life has been defeated many times
in its fight against depression. Then destiny emerges in man's
consciousness as a form of the irreparable.
Facing Silence
Once you have come to set great store by silence, you have hit
upon a fundamental expression of life in the margins. The rever-
ence for silence of great solitaries and founders of religions has far
deeper roots than we think. Men's presence must have been un-
endurable and their complex problems disgusting for one not to
care about anything except silence.
Chronic fatigue predisposes to a love of silence, for in it
words lose their meaning and strike the ear with the hollow
sonority of mechanical hammers; concepts weaken, expressions
lose their force, the word grows barren as the wilderness. The ebb
and flow of the outside is like a distant monotonous murmur un-
able to stir interest or curiosity. Then you will think it useless to
express an opinion, to take a stand, to make an impression; the
noises you have renounced increase the anxiety of your soul.
After having struggled madly to solve all problems, after having
suffered on the heights of despair, in the supreme hour of revela-
tion, you will find that the only answer, the only reality, is silence.
The Double and His Art
One does not learn the art of psychology, one lives and experi-
ences it, for no science will give you the key to the mysteries of
the soul. One cannot become a good psychologist without turn-
ing oneself into an object of study, evincing daily interest in the
complexity of one's own case. To be initiated into the mysteries of
the Other, you must first be initiated into your own. In order to be
a psychologist, you must be sufficiently unhappy to understand
happiness, so refined that you could become a barbarian at any
moment, and so intensely desperate that you do not know
whether you live in a desert or in the midst of a fire. Protean,
equally centripetal and centrifugal, your ecstasy will have to be
esthetic, sexual, religious, and perverse.
Fine psychological understanding is the product of a
life of self-contemplation, a life which sees itself in other lives as if
in so many mirrors; for a psychologist, all men are fragments
of himself. The psychologist's contempt for others contains a
grain of secret and unlimited self-irony. No one practices psy-
chology out of love: it is rather a form of sadism, a desire to
annihilate the other by taking possession of his intimate being,
by stripping him of his mysterious aura. Quickly exhausting men
and their limited resources, the psychologist is easily bored, for
he is not naive enough to have friends and is too self-conscious
to have lovers. Skepticism is not the beginning but the nat-
ural end of psychology. It is nature's punishment for this
violator of mysteries, this supremely indiscreet person who, hav-
