Colonel Erich von Lehrgen, assistant to the Deputy Chief of Operations, former Deputy Chief of Personnel – he could go on – did not often find himself at a loss for words. Silence, yes. Silence he was good at. When you were years too young for your title, you learned not to speak out of turn, even when you wanted to. Which usually he didn’t. If anything, his time in the military had more often been spent learning when to speak his mind than the opposite. Quiet and bookish as far back as he remembered, he probably would’ve been teased mercilessly about it as a child if he’d spent enough time with other children his age. By the time he’d been packed up and shipped off to cadet school he’d stood half a head above anyone else in his grade – too tall to tease mercilessly – so it hadn’t been until he’d been put in charge of younger students and found himself explaining intricate, unnecessary details of hows and whys that he’d found the joy in talking too much. Only rarely, very rarely, was he silent when he didn’t want to be. He got the feeling if he put time he didn’t have into looking back at it, there really was only one person capable of rendering him speechless. Tanya von Degurechaff. Lieutenant Colonel. Still a rank below him, for now. Not that it mattered on the average day. Serious, studious, and intolerant of things ranging from stupid questions to deliberate chaos long before he’d turned thirty, Lehrgen was in many ways the natural enemy of school-aged children. Or rather, they were his. On the whole, he was quite patient with explaining things to them. Excepting one. There were books worth of things that need to be explained to Degurechaff. Volumes worth of books. Volumes that she appeared to have already read closely enough to twist words and arguments the way she wanted them to go. The handful of times he’d debated a point with her had always ended with him somewhat more mixed up about which side he was on than when they’d started. He knows how I feel about Degurechaff, Lehrgen griped to himself, looking back up at his boss, Kurt von Rudersdorf, after he’d finished reading his newest orders, so confusing they may as well have been written in a foreign language. As a matter of fact, I think everyone knows how I feel about Degurechaff. Little more needed to be said on that subject. Monster, abnormal, inhumane, killer doll, dangerous, has a screw loose. All of these and more were words he'd used to describe Lieutenant Colonel Tanya von Degurechaff. He wasn't alone among the officers in those opinions, though most surprisingly, he was the most vocal. She was other things, too, a true genius of a tactician, a patriotic citizen, ambitious. In anyone else he might have praised those qualities, but in her, they only brought out the worst. Lehrgen watched for a hint of a smile on the other man’s face, hoping today’s date meant that the official-looking paper putting him in charge of Degurechaff and her battalion was Rudersdorf’s idea of a practical joke. After deciding that lieutenant generals didn’t often make jests out of orders mid-war, he nodded and replied "very good, sir," then left to go lock himself in his office and stick his head in his hands for a few minutes. As soon as he was in his chair, he pulled open a drawer and found a bottle of aspirin for the burgeoning headache. He wondered how many years, at this point, anxiety over Degurechaff had shaved off his life. Making it to forty was beginning to feel like a distant dream. Her possible methods varied – heart attack, aneurysm, complications from a stomach ulcer – but the fact that she would be at fault remained. It might have been kinder, to himself and the rest of the world, to tempt her into an outright murder. His fate was already sealed; he could do the same to hers by involving the military police. Silently, he drew a book of matches from his pocket, striking one to light a cigarette. If he'd been a more impulsive man, he might have set fire to the documents sitting on his desk before he put the flame out, taking pleasure in watching the words go up in smoke and imagining their disappearance would erase all memory of them ever existing. Summoning the willpower to give his next assignment a thorough review, he unfolded the papers and unconsciously smoothed them out, as though making them look more presentable might somehow improve his attitude towards their contents. What he found gave him a pleasant shock. He readjusted his glasses and read it again to make sure he hadn't missed some detail that would spoil the good news. His command would largely be in name only. He leaned his head back and gave a sigh of relief. His contact with Degurechaff would be limited to infrequent visits to whichever circle of hell disguised under the innocuous name of "front" she occupied. Lehrgen's primary task was to begin negotiations with the Kingdom of Ildoa, their diplomats so far having been lackadaisical in their jobs to end the war via means other than war. There were days he wondered if the Imperial Army’s infantile attempts at propaganda convinced anyone; then there were days like today, when he wondered whether it had convinced people who were supposed to know better. The Army had enough on its plate, it had no business adding functions that belonged to other branches. More than anything, the Empire needed an ally. Someone to hand off the Southern Continent to so that their forces could be concentrated on the Eastern Front where they were needed most. With every step they went east, the north-to-south stretch of the front grew longer. His titular placement at the head of a combat group was simply to provide an alibi for his whereabouts and accomplishments while he made deals that might look on the surface like the beginning stages of a military coup. Once a bargain had been struck he could hand off the work through the proper channels, and no one needed to be the wiser that hadn’t been where it started. He couldn't pretend that it thrilled him to think of another country joining the fray. No matter that it was to finally be on their side, every step towards expanding the war only took them one step closer to the nightmarish scenario Degurechaff had written up when she described an entire continent descending into madness, war the only economy and death the only export. Well, I'm not going to complain too much, Lehrgen sighed. Backroom negotiations intended to end the greatest war mankind had ever seen and that he was only marginally qualified for might not be what one would call a simple job, but it was infinitely preferable to his original conception of the assignment. In comparison to dealing with Degurechaff, it was positively enjoyable. With a satisfied nod, he folded the paper and put it in his briefcase. He'd head out to the Eastern Front as soon as possible to get the most unpalatable bit of his duties over first - meeting with his new subordinate - and then he'd go south, aiming to put a stop to the war, which would mean a stop to Degurechaff's climb through the ranks. If the weather out east was anything like that in Berun, the winter was officially over. Any snow should be long gone, so there would be no delays in the rail service to get him to, and more importantly, from, the front. Then, he could then look forward to spending a balmy few weeks in Ildoa. He didn't mind the cold, he'd grown up in the far eastern reaches of the Empire, but after a long winter, it would be a welcome respite. He made a mental note to brush up on the Ildoan language. Diplomacy would almost certainly be carried out in Françoise or Albionian, both of which he knew well. Still, it never hurt to understand the native language of your hosts. He might catch wind of additional intelligence if he could overhear conversations others thought he couldn't follow. He was assured several long train rides over the coming days, which would give plenty of opportunity for study. 
 April 4, 1927Schlesischer Bahnhof, Imperial Capital Berun
 The piercing whistle of an approaching train only added to the eerie atmosphere of the empty station. A haunting, distant wail warning everything in its path of danger, it was the only sound to be heard above the light patter of rain on the roof of the platform. Berun's major train stations, on the average day, were among the loudest places in the entire city. Bustling with travelers, the atriums were a clamor of feet and voices, the platforms each inundated by the sound of clanging bells, steaming whistles, screeching brakes and shouting attendants, the farewells between passengers and those left behind barely making themselves heard. There was something almost unnatural to the quiet of the pre-dawn hour, to a liminal space meant to be full and in motion sitting hollow and still. Roused out of a sort of standing doze a few minutes later by the noise of the train pulling in, Colonel von Lehrgen stifled a yawn as he leaned over and looked down the tracks, the creeping sensation that he wasn't meant to be there fading as the sleepy station came awake. A scattering of businessmen and what looked to be a group of elderly women traveling together had, by now, joined him on the platform, though it was still a lonely scene. He glanced at the nearest clock, noting with satisfaction that the train was coming in exactly on schedule, a few minutes before the hour. The fourth year of the war was drawing to a close; it gave him hope for the state of the country that the burdens of blockades and ever-changing fronts hadn't yet become cause for erratic service. After the winter they'd had, hope was what he needed. He'd never been a man of extravagant appetites, a trait which he'd never been more thankful for. Even for those who could afford the expense, a decent variety of food was getting harder and harder to come by. His fellow citizens were nearly all beset by drawn and tired faces, only exchanged for smiles by the thought that it would finally be over soon. There were no other great powers bordering the Empire. The Federation was the last thing standing in their way. Lehrgen pulled out his pocket watch - a bit of an affectation, at this point, most military men had given them up in favor of wristwatches, but the old heirloom lent an air of refinement to a life becoming increasingly occupied by utilitarian concerns. It was running fast, as it was wont to do, reading a minute past five, and he pulled off a glove to reset it according to the precise accuracy of the station's timekeeping. The air was cold on the exposed hand, the morning dark and damp. The sun wouldn't be up to warm the city for another hour and a half, but he was appreciative of the chill for its help in keeping him awake. Though, the two cups of coffee he'd had before leaving the house were probably helping more. He was used to long hours, and some of his weariness was the accumulated weight of not having slept a full night in what felt like months, if not years. But even by his standards, this day would be tiring. He'd take any help he could remaining alert, including cooperative weather. He liked to think he had good reason for the early morning departure. The line he was traveling terminated in Konigsberg, so he'd have to transfer trains there regardless, and he was long overdue for a visit home. Work always came before personal business, especially in trying times, but even if he were to head directly to the front he would arrive late into the evening, when little would be expected of him until the next day. If things went to plan, he'd instead arrive to his final destination in the early hours of the following morning, cutting out another few hours of badly needed sleep. Boarding the first train to Konigsberg and the last one out would give him time in between to hire a car and make a quick stop in to the family estate that lay outside the city. He saw little enough of bucolic tranquility these days, and it would be a nice break between the busy office and the maelstrom of the Eastern Front. The countryside between Berun and Konigsberg was largely farmland, which grew repetitive after a time. There was something comforting, though, in observing the farmers beginning their days, their routines little changed since the dawn of the agricultural revolution some ten thousand years or more in the past. No matter how well or badly the war was going, cows still needed milking and fields still needed tending. The Imperial Army had millions of mouths to feed. Snapping himself out of what had grown into an overly romanticized reflection on the consistency of farm labor, Lehrgen tried to refocus on his work. For the next several hours, he alternated between reading his stack of briefings and studying the Ildoan language. He ordered coffee nearly each time the service cart came through, the gentle rocking along the tracks threatening him with sleep. The train pulled into Konigsberg just past one in the afternoon. He made the fifteen-minute walk north from the central station to the river, needing a short break between train and taxi. The city was the same as ever. Full of beautiful churches and streets lined with colorful, Dutch-style buildings, the variegated rooflines added a visual flair that Berun lacked. It gave one the impression of stepping back in time, if the cars rumbling along the roads could be ignored. The city was as of yet untouched by the war, at least physically. There was a wariness evident in the eyes of most of the adult residents, who knew enough of current affairs to know that the front was too close for their liking. After making a quick walk along the banks of the Pregel, Lehrgen knocked on the window of a cab idling on the street. The driver was hesitant to go the requested distance at first. He hastily changed his mind after sufficient funds were withdrawn from a wallet to pay the man what he'd usually earn for an entire day's work. The ride took about an hour, and then Lehrgen stepped out into a courtyard where a servant was already waiting to take his bag. Strategizing for the military had given him an intense dislike for surprise changes to plans, so he had phoned ahead to inform his family of his pending arrival. His brother's children, seven and four, were the first to greet him. They were shooed away by a nanny after a minute of frenetic jumping which he tolerated but wouldn't go so far as to say he enjoyed, and then he was ushered into the dining room, where a late lunch awaited him. Even the estates aren't eating like they used to, Lehrgen thought, looking down at his plate. It was tasty, but that was owed to the quality of the cook rather than the quality of the ingredients. It was a good thing he took his coffee with cream only. With the Commonwealth's blockade, even sugar was missing from most tables these days. "Do we need to worry about what's going on in Warsau?" his mother asked, after the first course had been served. "I wouldn't take a trip there," he replied carefully. Officially, nothing was happening in Warsau, but it was hard to keep all news from spreading, especially when it came to people who had plenty of idle time for gossip. The truth was, the Federation had learned too quickly and too well from the Empire. Over the past decade or two, the relationship between the Imperial government and its Polaskan territories had been good, but there were many who remembered when that wasn't the case, who still considered the Empire an occupying power. When each year meant less food on the table, you couldn't blame people for wondering whether they'd be involved in a war if they had their independence. Of course, most knew that the answer was yes. As a neutral state bounded by Europa's largest countries, they might have fared even worse when the two went to war. But when the Federation offered independence, with their protection, it began to look possible. Ownership had been transitioning, but a region where most of the large farms and factories were still owned by Germanian families was ripe for the sort of workers' revolution the communists insisted was necessary. It was no rebellion yet, but it was a thorn in the side of the Imperial government. "We'll just have to wait to go until the war's over. Should be soon, yes?" his father interjected. Erich caught his brother Otto's questioning look, and gave a single, short shake of his head, then had to stop himself from smiling inopportunely. Some things never changed. Their father would never believe that the Empire was anything less than invincible. He could see how it might look that way from the outside. They'd progressed stunningly fast through Federation territory at first. The country had attacked suddenly, before their army had mobilized fully, as though the leader had been in a sudden pique one day and thought it would be fun to fire a few shots over the border. But between the vast distance that Imperial supplies had to travel to get to any active front and the entirety of the Federation's forces called up to do battle, the situation had slowed into little better than a stalemate. In the hopes of breaking it, the occupied territories had been scraped of their garrisons to provide the men for a spring offensive. Predictably, this had emboldened the resistance fighters, but so far, it was just another thorn, not a major threat to the integrity of the Empire. Regardless, victory certainly could not be described as "at hand." The Empire's plans to defend their own borders had never included how to spread their men among multiple occupation zones and a front that ran from the Black Sea to the eastern Baltic, let alone battles across the Mediterranean. At this point, it was more ingenuity preventing a crack in the lines than anything else. They'd advanced too far, too fast, but there was no way to reveal that when the fact that he was about to go off begging for an ally was a state secret. And anyway, additional information won't do much good, he thought to himself. Even had he wanted to break confidentiality, there was little more the family could do to prepare for the worst-case scenario. Every landholder in the east knew there was a chance their estates would have to be abandoned in a hurry. His home in Berun - the family home, really - had been the lucky recipient of most valuables. The housekeeper must have an easier time dusting these days, he smiled ruefully to himself. The ornamental trinkets, heavy silver candlesticks and decorative chinaware, anything they could live without had been carefully wrapped and boxed and shipped to Berun as soon as war with the Federation had been declared. When the meal finished, the family retired to a drawing room to continue the conversation. Half an hour in, he noticed a familiar piece of paper in his niece's hand and quickly snatched it away. Some random childish whim must have compelled her to peruse the pockets of his coat while it hung in the hall. He tried to remember at what age children learned to read proficiently and decided that aside from a certain anomaly that he was determined not to think about until tomorrow, a seven-year-old would not be able to make heads or tails of the classified document. She'll cause trouble with that habit one day, Lehrgen thought, shaking his head. He'd have to be careful as she grew older. His briefcase was often full of information not meant for other eyes, and it would be troublesome if his own family couldn't be trusted not to go through it. He bade them goodbye when the hour came, and then it was back into his cab and back onto the train for the evening, taking another cup of coffee as soon as he boarded. He'd like nothing more than to rest his head against the window and let the train's steady advance towards the front fade into nothing more than a bad dream. Extravagant meals weren’t the only luxuries he missed. 




 

 Who's the scariest of them all?






 
 "Some cause happiness wherever they go; others whenever they go."
 
 April 4, 1927Imperial Province of East Preussland
 An Imperial officer's uniform granted one a certain amount of power, even outside the Army. Not every citizen could judge an exact rank from shoulder insignia and collar, but most could deduce that more decoration indicated a higher position. A man with braids on his shoulder instead of stripes commanded automatic deference. If an Imperial officer, running late for his train, needed to push his way through a crowded station, people moved aside and issued apologies for being in the way instead of muttering curses under their breath. Where the average man might be accused of being late because of a personal defect, an officer was presumed late because of a tireless, unrelenting schedule. When Colonel von Lehrgen put his bag and coat down on the seat next to him, he did not immediately follow, first taking the time to straighten out his uniform and collect his thoughts. He wasn't so unfit from constant desk work that his run for the train had made him winded, but, unused to being late, the experience had left him out-of-sorts. Though he'd never been unduly concerned with appearances, disheveled was not the first word he wanted coming to mind. Taking a deep breath, he dropped into his seat, closed the curtain, and turned on a light. From out of his fast-fraying briefcase he drew the stack of papers that had Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff's latest briefing, taking out a pencil as well so that any questions that occurred to him could be scribbled out and asked of her once he arrived. Page unmarked and pencil unused, both were placed back in the case once he'd finished. For the first time in his memory, he needed neither clarification nor further detail. No omissions, no oversights, nothing ambiguous or extraneous. Her explanation was clear, methodical, and concise, worthy of being passed out as an example to all other officers on how their own briefings should be written. It's annoying to admit, but it's perfect, Lehrgen thought, with a shake of his head. "Excuse me, Colonel?" he heard a few hours later, accompanied by a knock at the door to his compartment. He looked up and saw Lieutenant Colonel Ugar. Lehrgen shuffled his papers into the appearance of organization and bade him enter. "I was wondering if I might bother you for a favor," Ugar told him, thankfully getting straight to the point of his interruption. "I hear you're bound for the front." Lehrgen nodded in confirmation. "I'm getting off at the next station, but there's a few items I'd like to see sent on that will need to be personally delivered," Ugar continued. Lehrgen didn't know Ugar very well, but the man had always given him the impression of being competent and well-meaning, so Lehrgen figured it wouldn't hurt to do as he asked. A colonel wasn't typically used as an errand boy, but with personnel as strained as it was, he took no insult to being asked to serve in that capacity. "That's not a problem," he replied. "Thank you, sir, I'll be back in a minute," Ugar said, giving a quick salute before exiting. He returned carrying a few boxes, which he placed on the empty seats across from Lehrgen. "Coffee and chocolates for Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff. I wish I could give them to her in person but…" he trailed off with a shrug, shaking his head in disappointment. "I do hope that isn't meant for her," Lehrgen said, raising an eyebrow and pointing at the small bottle of liquor that was balanced atop the boxes. "No, sir," Ugar laughed. "Consider that my thanks for the assistance." "It's no trouble." "I received it as a gift myself, and I don't drink, so someone should enjoy it." "An officer who doesn't drink is a rare creature," Lehrgen said with a hint of a smile. It was entirely possible Berun's bars were making better profits than the military's armaments suppliers at this point. "I want to set a good example for my daughter," Ugar told him, pulling out a small picture of the girl from his wallet and handing it over. Lehrgen reluctantly took it, hoping he wasn't going to sit through half an hour of humoring a proud parent while Ugar told him every last thing about the girl. "Very...cute," he said, with a forced smile. It wasn't a lie, exactly, but to Lehrgen, she was indistinguishable from a thousand other Imperial children. "It's strange to think that the Lieutenant Colonel looked like her not so long ago," Ugar commented. There's nothing similar about them besides being blonde girls, Lehrgen thought to himself. Ugar's daughter was smiling at the camera with the sort of placid, round eyes that gave children their look of innocence. The orphanage had taken a photo of Degurechaff once a year, which he'd seen when he stopped by. The first ones were essentially normal, but in every picture from age three onwards it would be more correct to say that she was trying to stare the camera down than to say she was staring into the camera, her gaze intense in a way that was alarming on the face of a child. "Hopefully your daughter won't grow up so fast," Lehrgen offered, trying to find something kind to say. "Yes," Ugar agreed. "I can't help but be reminded of her whenever I see Colonel von Degurechaff, and how easily my daughter could have been in her place." Lehrgen could do little else but smile politely and nod along, although he privately wondered what sort of father would want to compare his daughter to a girl that had a kill count so high it looked like an artillery number. They said there were things you couldn't understand until you had children of your own, but he didn't think this was one of them. Unless Ugar's daughter had recently done business with the devil himself, Lehrgen judged it unlikely that she had any chance of turning out similarly to the Army's youngest officer. "I mean no criticism of high command," Ugar continued, "but it does seem a bit sad that we put boys and girls so young to use when they should be enjoying childhood." Lehrgen resisted the urge to put a hand on Ugar's shoulder, tell him he seemed like a good man, and so, for the love of God, he should keep the hell away from Degurechaff before she corrupted him. "Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff volunteered well before conscription age," he reminded Ugar, keeping out his personal suspicion that it was her way of finding a legal means to satisfy her bloodthirsty nature. The other man shrugged. "I'm sure it seemed a nicer life than what she had at the orphanage," he replied. Even after seeing her terrifying display of cruelty at the academy, Lehrgen had been willing to extend her the benefit of the doubt. He'd looked for some reason, any reason, that might have made her turn out so fundamentally broken. But there had been no abuse, no starvation, no religious or nationalist zealotry. "Her orphanage was well-run and well-provisioned. I checked myself," he told Ugar, hoping to take some shine off the martyrdom that he apparently imagined for her. Ugar considered for a moment. "Still," he said, tapping his chin, "before we were at war, I can't help but think the prospect of a rank that made her feel meaningful and the accompanying pocket money didn't seem worth the effort. She was going to have to go through training one day, and the sooner she got it out of the way the sooner she could start a better life." Lehrgen nodded absently as an unpleasant tension gripped him. He'd told himself he'd given her a fair chance, that he'd looked for a reason, an excuse for how she turned out. Now that he thought about it, he had been looking for a reason she'd turned out to be some sort of monster, not a reason to disprove the thesis itself. He hadn't, perhaps, given enough thought to whether there might be some other reason behind her actions entirely. Had his preconception of her colored his ability to think critically? It had never occurred to him that she might have had a motive as simple as Ugar's for enlisting so early. No, he decided. No, if that were the only thing, then I might owe her an apology. But there are so many other malicious oddities about her. Being sympathetic to her would only open an avenue for her to manipulate him with. She was smart enough and well-connected enough to know the two of them were at odds. Surely she'd find any excuse she could to defy him. Showing even the smallest ounce of pity for her could be disastrous. Thankfully, the conversation turned to easier subjects in the final minutes before Ugar's departure, and the fleeting moment of doubt faded. After a few more hours, the train pulled into the closest station to the ever-moving front. His adjutant had gone immediately on when they stopped in Konigsberg, so was already there, his car waiting to take him to the field headquarters. By most measures, the Rhine had been worse than the east by an order of magnitude. In the east, there were no squalid trenches. There weren't dead bodies mixed in amongst the living for them to trip over. The land hadn't yet been torn apart to resemble something more akin to an alien planet than a place fit for human habitation. There were no sinkholes made of mud to disappear into if one stepped in the wrong place. Successes usually resulted in real territory gains, not the taking of a handful of prisoners during a trench raid. For Lehrgen personally, he had to say he preferred the western front. As an officer of some rank who was there to inspect, not to command, he was rarely, if ever, required to visit the frontline trenches. The trenches further back in the system weren't where he'd want to make a permanent home, but they had been outfitted with some minimal comforts. Often, he wasn't required to stay in the trenches at all, but was put up in the nearest town. The northeast was rural and sparsely populated. Unless you were near the rare city along the current border, the "closest town" was usually more of a hamlet made up of a few homes so modest they still had thatched roofing. No matter if you were at rest or not, the living quarters were ad-hoc tents pitched and then collapsed as the front moved. He ducked into what would be his own small tent for the next few nights and decided it was best he'd arrived already exhausted. He'd been awake for an hour shy of a full day, so the questionable comfort of the cot was all he needed to fall asleep straight away. The activity of camp life didn't allow for sleeping in, so after what qualified as more of a nap than a night's rest, he was awakened by the surrounding clamor and rubbed the sleep from his eyes to start the day. The sun shined brightly into the tent that served as headquarters, illuminating everything in an ethereal morning haze as steam rose off the wet ground. Almost on the verge of smiling at that combined with the pleasant aroma of fresh coffee, the high-pitched utterance of "Colonel von Lehrgen," that greeted him a second later instantly put him on edge. He turned slightly to his left to see Degurechaff standing at attention. "Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff," he replied, returning her salute. "Your newest orders," he said, passing her the envelope that contained them. Her adjutant brought him a cup of the fragrant coffee he'd smelled brewing while he waited for her to read them. Well-prepared coffee was a rarity on the front, so after taking his first sip and determining it was enjoyable instead of merely tolerable, he turned and passed his compliments to Lieutenant Serebryakov. It was no wonder Degurechaff kept her around. His new subordinate finished reading, looked up, and gave him a bizarrely radiant smile. This was not an unusual occurrence. He'd never been able to figure out her attitude towards him. His best guess so far was that she was baring her teeth at him in a show of hostility and he was mistaking it for a more normal expression. "I look forward to working with you, sir," she told him, and then gave orders to Serebryakov to summon Major Weiss. She waited for the other woman to leave before continuing their conversation. "Am I to understand that in truth we are to be seeing very little of each other?" she asked, turning back to him. "Yes. I have other duties to attend to and you have proven your ability to command with minimal oversight," he replied, unsurprised that she'd gleaned that information from her orders. "If I may clarify, in your absence, do I have permission to operate based on my own assessment of the best course of action?" she continued. He nodded. "So far as your decisions do not conflict with the overall strategy we will be discussing shortly, permission granted. If you deem it necessary to deviate you will inform me as soon as feasible, but if it is not possible to do so beforehand, you may act as you see fit in the meantime," he confirmed. "May I ask where I should reach you, sir?" She was much too sharp if she'd realized his nominal leadership was likely a front for something else. Having a smart subordinate was useful, but having one smarter than yourself could be troublesome. "Headquarters will put you through," he said in lieu of an answer. She got the point, but continued digging nonetheless, ticking off options. "I suppose you could be fomenting a rebellion in a second Federation principality," she mused. "Or, it's possible with the way things are going one of the neutral powers will declare for our side," she continued. He fought to keep his face from showing any reaction. "The States or the Commonwealth might be willing to play both sides if it means the death of the Federation, so perhaps they'd be willing to provide loans, or if we're in such straits that we're considering capital infusions from less-than-friendly foreign powers, it's possible we're looking to make peace," she finished, drifting away from the correct answer. Having gotten no indication of which guess was the right one, she gave a shrug. "In any case, I wish you success in your endeavors. I'd prefer not to endure another eastern winter with nothing more than a tent and blanket." How novel, he thought to himself. There are parts of war that even she doesn't like. "If I can be half as successful as you typically are, I'll count myself lucky," he answered. He wasn't above giving credit where it was due. She smiled at the compliment and then shifted back to contemplation. "One more question, sir. If you are to disagree with a decision I made…?" she said, leaving the question unfinished. "You will explain it to me and I will manage the rest," he confirmed. He didn't like it, but there was no help for it. "Though I think it more likely that your problem will be the opposite, and whatever glory you win will have to be shared," he told her. She nodded. "A fair trade," was all she said. Most soldiers would jealously guard their triumphs, but if you took into account that she was in the war to have fun, not to win medals, her attitude made sense. She sat down at the table across from him and unrolled a map. Serebryakov returned with Weiss moments later, and the strategy session began. It became clear within a few minutes that coffee was not the only reason Serebryakov was kept around. Her attitude was easy-going, but she had a keen mind and a quick sense of humor. Weiss was solidly capable as well. Lehrgen would wager Serebryakov was smarter, but the unit's second-in-command was a more well-rounded soldier, more able in both magical and non-magical combat and more seasoned. He could see why Degurechaff had recommended him as her successor. Her judgment isn't bad on everything, he reflected. He also observed that she did seem to genuinely trust her subordinates, and that the trust was returned. Serebryakov he could understand, the woman had barely ever served another superior, so she probably didn't realize how exacting her lieutenant colonel was, but Weiss would have had commanders who were more jovial and less demanding. Watching the person next to you constantly pull off near-miracles probably addles your brain after a time, he decided. Before he forgot, Lehrgen interjected a quick thank you for the work the three had done in realizing the faulty intelligence the interrogators had been getting out of the Federation prisoners. If not for them, his negotiations wouldn't be remotely possible. The distraction caused by a provincial rebellion in former Federation territory had shifted the balance enough in the Empire's favor that they could hope to make a case for a quick victory once their southern front was defended by an allied power. "The credit is due to Lieutenant Serebryakov," Degurechaff said in response. "She recognized the error and was able to make the correct translations." The woman in question shook her head quickly. "If Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff hadn't pressed the issue I wouldn't have realized what a problem it was," Serebryakov deflected, adding, "and if it weren't for Major Weiss, I don't think the prisoners would have talked." Degurechaff gave a short laugh at that. "True, unfortunately neither my lieutenant nor I have the ability to make faces quite as intimidating as our Major here," she said, elbowing the man next to her. The small lieutenant colonel was known for making faces so terrifying that it had inspired many grown men to fear her more than death. For her next birthday, he was buying her a mirror. 




 

 It's Raining Men, Amen






 
 "I like men who have a future and women who have a past."
 
 April 7, 1927Outside Smolansk, Imperial Ober Ost
 
 From east to west and north to south, serving the largest cities down to provincial towns, through field and forest, over rivers and under mountains, the Empire's world-class rail system whisked its citizens away to nearly anywhere they desired at speeds that grew faster by the decade. Despite this, as large as the country now was, especially counting the captured territory under administration, to ride from one end to another still took over a day once connections were factored in. When time was of the essence, a new technology had come to replace an overnight ride - the airplane. Given the choice between the two, Colonel Erich von Lehrgen would have gladly taken the longer journey, even if he couldn't be guaranteed a spot in first class and had to suffer the discomforts of sleeping in his seat. He would even have taken a schedule where one of his connections was spent shivering on a platform in the middle of the night; however, due to the distance between the northeastern front and his final destination in Ruma, the Army had decided to dispatch a pilot to fly him to Minna, from which he'd board the train south. He'd never ridden in an aircraft before, and although he knew the physics were theoretically sound, something about being thousands of meters in the air with nothing besides a piece of large cloth to rescue him in the event of failure made him innately apprehensive about the whole idea. He trusted the Empire's engineers, but nobody was perfect. Accidents weren't by any means unheard of. He'd known flying was in his future when he'd received his orders, so he'd made his peace with it over the few days in between. It wasn't how he'd imagined sacrificing himself for his country when he'd signed on for a career as a soldier, but risking his life was part of the job description. Compared to most of his compatriots fighting in the trenches who had to wake up every day wondering if it would be there last, he'd gotten off easily so far. He'd gone to bed the night before his flight reminding himself to be thankful for that. His next memory was shooting up in bed, startled into wakefulness. Though really, during his first recollections of the morning he was already in an upright position. He only assumed he'd shot up in bed because as far as he was aware, he'd never been known to sleep sitting up. Awakening to predawn mists was a feeling he was well-accustomed to, but the relative silence outside his tent told him that it wasn't the whistle announcing the start to the day that had roused him. The silence could only be described as relative, because a camp never truly went to sleep the way his leafy neighborhood on the outskirts of Berun did. He couldn't remember his dream, but it was unlikely that the pounding of his heart could be ascribed to anything other than another vision of spiraling down out of the sky. Tired, frustrated, and more than anything disappointed in himself, he flopped back down onto his pillow - he'd have to remember to thank his adjutant for finding him one - and dragged the scratchy bedspread back up under his chin to guard against the cold. He didn't know what time it was, he refused to check his watch and see what ungodly hours he was keeping, but he was determined to stay abed until the official start to the day. Thirty minutes later, by his estimate, he was still awake. An hour and thirty minutes later as well, and the call to rise still hadn't sounded, so he broke his own promise and turned over to reach for the uniform folded on the ground next to him. He found the pack of matches he was searching for and struck one, putting it to the kerosene lamp by his bed and illuminating the tent in a soft glow. If he couldn't sleep, he might as well work. He lit a cigarette with the same match, cursing under his breath when the flame burned down too far and nipped at his fingers. Not yet, he repeated to himself nearly every other minute. A nervous energy had taken hold, compelling him to go in search of the plane he'd ride in, as though looking at it would make any difference. He wouldn't even know what to look for. Unless a wing or a propeller was missing, he wouldn't be able to tell that something was amiss. He did his best to let his work distract him, but mostly he ended up being distracted from his work, accomplishing little beyond putting his signature to a few items that didn't require a thorough review. He was the first one in the officers' mess, but after two bites of toast he couldn't stomach another, so he did a tour of the camp, a final inspection before he left, the brisk air calming until he unconsciously arrived in front of the makeshift flight field twenty minutes ahead of schedule. What he hadn't counted on during even his worst imaginations of what might go wrong was that he'd be caught looking doubtfully at the plane, anxiously going over the parachute he'd found a few times to make sure everything looked in order, by someone who could neither appreciate nor understand fear. A normal human could have sympathized with his position, left him feeling relieved instead of deeply ashamed of his own cowardice. "Ahh, pardon me, Colonel," he heard from behind him, and he only just prevented himself from jumping. "Lieutenant Sauer asked me to give this to you and tell you he'll be by with the rest of your things in fifteen minutes." Lehrgen took his briefcase from Degurechaff's outstretched hand. "I was already heading out this way," she continued, "this is the area I've been using for training when we have the time to spare." "If there's one unit in this entire army that doesn't need further training, I think it's yours," he commented wryly. She shook her head. "The replacements I was sent aren't up to the level of the men before them. They're a danger to the rest of my battalion until I've drilled the conventional learning out of them." "Just so long as you don't kill any of them in the process," he admonished, to the officer who needed that reminder more than any other. "Nothing but aerial maneuvers today. Flying alone doesn't tend to be deadly." "Falling does, though," Lehrgen shot back to what had felt like a jab at his own anxiety. "Not always," Degurechaff laughed, "I've survived it a few times." Looking back at it later, Lehrgen would conclude that she may have actually been trying to help. Whatever her intentions, she went about her attempt at small talk in such a backwards fashion that it was tearing any lingering confidence Lehrgen had that he'd survive his journey to shreds. She began to share some of her own flying and parachute mishaps, which under other circumstances may have qualified as a conversation he was willing to have with her, but at the moment was making him wonder whether she'd bite if he slapped a hand over her mouth to shut her up and stop her from giving him more things to worry about. She hadn't been an especially talkative person in the few days he'd been with her on the front. Why she'd chosen now of all times to strike up a vaguely personal conversation was a question he'd pay to have an answer to. He'd never heard her speak more than a sentence or two at a time about anything besides practical matters. Not that he was complaining. The less she talked to him, the better. Hearing her reminisce, even though it wasn't a fond reminiscence, was strangely disconcerting. He thought of her as a fellow soldier, so talking about work was fine, but he had trouble thinking of her as a fellow human being, so hearing that she had personal feelings on any subject was nothing short of jarring. Nothing, though, would top the pure mortification of being patronized by someone half his age and size. Finished with her ramblings about near-death experiences, the girl who regularly risked getting shot from the sky and had once been strapped to a long-range missile decided the appropriate way to end the discussion was to reach up and pat his shoulder over his continued unease about what amounted to a short, safe, and simple flight. A comradely clap on the arm wasn't the same coming from someone who wasn't old enough to buy a beer. Instead of departing and leaving him in peace, she stayed standing there, her eyes darting around like she was hunting for clues to his destination until he wanted to ask her whether she didn't have better things to do, like prepare for whatever torture she was about to inflict on the newest members of her battalion. "It's a shame you aren't allowed to bring your new subordinate along with you," she joked, after a minute passed in silence. "It's good for me to give Major Weiss some experience with commanding every so often." Lehrgen had to disagree with her there. Being stuck for hours in captivity with Degurechaff sounded rather like a brief visit to hell, to say nothing of the fact that he was on a diplomatic mission. His objectives would be difficult to achieve if he had someone tagging along who didn't realize disputes could be settled with means other than a weapon. "There's so many foreign foods I'd like to try," she sighed when he didn't respond, closing her eyes as if in longing. So she has at least one thing she likes besides bloodshed, Lehrgen thought, the admission startling to him. Maybe he should figure out how to send her on a gourmet tour of the world until the war was over so that she couldn't continually make their situation worse. "You don't know I'm going to another country," he reminded her. "You wouldn't be flying if you were going back to Berun," she replied with a smirk. "The Empire is quite large," he deflected. "You know, if I came along, you wouldn't have to worry about your parachute failing." It pained Lehrgen deeply to admit it, but he very nearly had a change of heart about her value as a companion. All aerial mages were required to be able to carry an additional person for short distances. In the event of disaster, having her there would almost guarantee his survival. Owing his life to her into perpetuity would complicate things, but at least he'd be alive. "You have important work to do here." She gave a little start, like she'd been on the verge of forgetting herself. Luckily, before he'd gotten too far into changing his mind on whether he might not mind her company, she revealed her true motive. "I'd never be derelict in my duties, sir. A foreign assignment would be a perfect chance to assess other armies firsthand," she replied stiffly. That would be a no. On second thought, he'd have to make sure Degurechaff never went anywhere that wasn't already destined to be a battlefield. He didn't need her to find new places or peoples she'd like to involve in her beloved war. Thankfully, his adjutant interrupted them a minute later carrying the small trunk of Lehrgen's personal effects he took around with him, and shortly thereafter his pilot made his presence known. With no little amount of unease, Lehrgen climbed on board. With a great shudder, the plane came to life. It shook the entirety of the time it sped down the dirt track, and Lehrgen thought for sure it would fall apart the first time a gust of wind came for it. It lifted off the ground, the curious sensation causing white knuckles and closed eyes, worsened by a disorienting feeling of floating freely for a second while they changed directions, and then it was leveled in the sky and his heartbeat was finally slowing back to a normal rhythm. After all the energy he'd spent worrying about it, it was almost a letdown that the ride was so uneventful. Not wanting to attempt conversation with the pilot and draw his concentration away from keeping them steady in the air, Lehrgen took a deep breath and peered down below. His fears disappeared momentarily, or at least took a back seat to wonder at the view of cities and towns from the air, the neat clusters of civilization giving way to a patchwork of farms in between. With the countless hours he spent poring over maps, his knowledge of geography was second only to a few other officers, so he could estimate their progress, guessing at what regions he was flying over as they went. Minna ranked among Lehrgen's favorite cities in the Empire, a sentiment widely shared by his countrymen. The Bevarians didn't conform as strictly to the Preussian codes of conduct as the Army would have liked, but in private, no officer could say that serving alongside their units wasn't fun. Any career soldier had one or two good stories about them. The spires of their finest city were visible from a distance, and Lehrgen kept his eyes trained on them as long as he could so he didn't have to see the ground growing closer as they landed. There would be no time for a quick stopover in the city today, but he couldn't contemplate eating lunch just yet anyways. At the main train station, he met his cover story, highly recommended by Intelligence, joining him as part of her own espionage assignment. Couples vacationing together were inherently less suspicious than foreign nationals crossing the border by themselves, and both governments involved wanted no record of their militaries meeting. For the next few weeks they would be Mr. &amp; Mrs. Schneider, with passports to prove it. They were recently married, honeymooning somewhere warmer, sunnier, and happier than home. Theoretically, she didn't know what he was going to Ildoa for. If the rumors about her were to be believed, she almost certainly had found out one way or another. "Second Lieutenant Elya Weber, sir" she introduced herself with a salute before they stepped into their cabin on the train. "Where were you assigned before this?" he asked, falling back on an easy form of small talk between soldiers. "I got in from Parisee yesterday. And you, sir?" "Flew in from Smolansk this morning." "Smolansk?" she asked, head perking up. "Where the Argent's unit is?" Lehrgen had to restrain himself from knocking his head against the window. Even now Degurechaff haunted him. "Yes," he answered grudgingly. "You wouldn't happen to have met her adjutant?" "Lieutenant Serebryakov?" "She was my roommate after we were first recruited. I do hope she was doing alright, sometimes I can't believe she's survived so long. She cried each time the drill instructor yelled at her for the first month." "As far as I could see she's adjusted well," Lehrgen answered. "Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff always speaks highly of her." "Good," Elya replied, checking her nails and taking a file out from her bag when she found one wanting. "Training made sisters out of us despite our backgrounds. She was minor nobility back when the Federation was the Tsardom, you know. I was just a girl putting on a show at Rudi's." Lehrgen blinked a few times and took a deep breath. He wasn't going to judge anyone's personal circumstances, so he wouldn't hold Lieutenant Weber's past against her. He was sure she'd made good money, if the straining buttons at the top of her uniform were any indication, but Rudi's wasn't the sort of establishment that most women would freely admit to working in. It was famous - or rather, infamous - to any long-time resident of Berun, though Lehrgen had never visited himself. "I hope you don't recognize too many officers from your time there," he replied after a minute, deciding the best way to handle it was to treat it with the same nonchalance that she was. She cocked her head in confusion, and then dissolved into a fit of laughter. "Apologies, sir," she said, wiping at her eyes, "in Dresdun, Rudi's was an independent theatre house. I ought to have clarified." Lehrgen's hand went to cover his eyes in humiliation. "I believe it's I who owe you an apology," he groaned. "I didn't mean to imply you seemed-" "No offense taken," she said, waving her hands in front of her and then giving him an impish grin. "Should I be honored that a man of such worldly experience has decided I'm worth settling down for, sir? I do believe I count as your first wife." "Lieutenant Weber," he humored her, "Since we're still in uniform I ought to give you a warning for that, but for now I'll call us even." “But will we not soon be seeing each other out of uniform, sir?” she asked, the coquettish grin telling him that he’d failed to chasten her with the admonition, and that she was having fun seeing what she could get away with. “Certain liberties will be granted seeing the role that we’re playing,” he conceded, before pointedly taking the conversation to a safer subject. "Do you plan on going back into acting after the war?" "A spy is always an actress," she commented. "And it's much more exciting when there are more consequences to forgetting your line than being booed offstage." It was becoming increasingly clear to him why Elya had been considered a natural fit for the current assignment. Not only was she skilled at subterfuge, she was…well, he'd just say that she was the type of woman men liked to impress and leave it at that. This was proved true shortly into their journey. Their passports were good fakes, they were official issue after all, but just in case there were any questions, she made sure the border guards' attention was elsewhere. Lehrgen wasn't sure they even looked at him a single time. They were much too focused on her description of the bathing suit she'd brought, and how she hoped something so modern wouldn't offend the good people of Ildoa. So began their meandering train ride south, from the border at Prenner where thick snow drifts had yet to melt, down through the flat northern plains, and to Firenzo, where the flowers were already in bloom. There, they made their final connection, waiting in a station that would never have passed Imperial inspection for the train to Ruma. The journey was remarkably less productive than Lehrgen had planned on it being, every conversation with Elya a chance for her to prod information out. He didn't need her trying the same thing on him as she had the poor Ildoan border police. He wanted to think it wouldn't work, but he'd prefer not to test that theory. Eventually he'd given up on trying to accomplish anything, leaned his head back, pulled his hat over his eyes, and pretended to sleep for a few hours. They checked in to a hotel together, he waved to the doorman as he announced he was off to buy cigarettes, and never returned. He would be staying at a different hotel under a different name, though he met Elya every day for either lunch or dinner to exchange any pertinent information. He wholly enjoyed her company for an hour or so, but any more than that and he had to begin watching what he said around her. Lehrgen met his Ildoan counterpart the day after he arrived. Domenico Boroni was a portly, gregarious man in his mid-50s. He was never without a cigar, and complained often about his gout, though not as often as he complained about his mother-in-law. He was sure the woman was still alive just to spite him. The five Boroni children were all still living off of their father's largesse, much to his chagrin. It took over a week of negotiations to reach a preliminary agreement. The Ildoans had their eyes on the Republican colonial territories on the Southern Continent. If they agreed to distract the Republic by opening a new front along the border between the Republican and Ildoan territories, it would free the Empire to send troops from the south to the thinly defended eastern lines. Any progress at all was good news, but the slow pace of the negotiations eventually wore on Lehrgen. The people of Ildoa had a rather indulgent attitude towards time. He sometimes considered whether he should defect and take up a position on the staff there. Apparently, he'd only be required to be at work about four hours out of the day, and up to three of those hours could be spent getting coffee, kicking his feet up on the desk and smoking a cigarette, or roaming around the office asking after the details of his colleagues' personal lives. After a few weeks, Lehrgen thought he might know Boroni's secretary better than the man himself. She at least maintained a semi-regular schedule and responded to his inquiries in a timely fashion. On the other hand, Signor Boroni existed, so far as he could tell, in three states. He was either not yet at work, was on his lunch break, or was napping. Napping! How nice it would be to tell his bosses that he'd get right to it…after lunch and a nap. Lehrgen wondered if the behavior wasn't a calculated play on stereotypes that provided an easy justification for delays as the Ildoan government watched how events unfolded. In the case that things began to tip more in the Empire's favor, the Ildoans could quickly sign a treaty and partake in some of the spoils of war. If things began to go the other way, they could pretend all this had never happened. He resigned himself to it and braced for many more weeks of unhurried talks. In the meantime, he didn't pass up the chance to savor his unexpected free time. He'd been to Ruma once before, but he'd been quite young, so his memory of the occasion was poor. There was only so much work he could do on his own down there, so there was no reason not to slow down the pace. When in Ruma, he told himself, idly sipping a glass of wine midday. He could eat a proper meal here, no rationing needed. It was a lovely city. Some of the ancient artifacts could have used a bit of care, but they were magnificent nonetheless. For many days there were new museums or gardens or old estates to visit. Eventually, those ran out, and he took to wandering the narrow streets, reading in cafés, and watching people pass by from his balcony, which turned out to be equally as enjoyable. When it came time to return home, Lehrgen found himself hoping he'd find an excuse to be back soon. Even if it did mean another flight. 
 
 April 17, 1927Occupied Ukrayna, Imperial Ober Ost
 
 Tanya may not have intended on personally commanding a Kampfgruppe in the aftermath of her proposal for their formation, but she’d admit that so far, the unintended consequences of leading one were largely beneficial. A blessing in disguise, instead of the curses disguised as blessings she was used to dealing with. Her complaints were the same as anyone in middle management - the number of people you had under you was directly correlated with the number of mistakes that could be blamed on you. Unlike with her core battalion, where she’d had some control over what might be termed the onboarding process, the other units in her Kampfgruppe had been assigned to her without any of her input. As someone who prided herself on her ability to find and encourage promising candidates, she took the difficulty of this task in stride. You couldn’t call someone an expert in talent management if they only knew how to work with employees who were already high performers. On the plus side, commanding more men gave her the chance to showcase her leadership abilities more than her combat skills. She’d never earn a coveted posting to the rear if everyone thought her good only for magically obliterating enemy soldiers. On top of that, since she wasn’t only leading her battalion, it gave her a better excuse to delegate that task to Major Weiss while she stayed warm and caffeinated coordinating from camp HQ. So far, all of his requests to take Lieutenant Serebryakov along on minor missions had been denied. How could Tanya be expected to think clearly if she couldn’t access a good cup of coffee when she needed it? Another unforeseen boon of traveling with a Kampfgruppe - specifically, traveling with tanks and infantry - was that it slowed everything down. Just let the General Staff try to throw her from hotspot to hotspot with no rest in between when she had to drag heavy machinery along with her. They might be motorized, but on uneven terrain, tanks would never come close to matching a mage’s speed through the air. This was all to say that while she’d received orders for her Kampfgruppe to head south with all haste a few days prior, they’d only just arrived. Now, all haste no longer meant an exhausting long-haul flight from one part of the front to another. And until someone invented a way of getting tanks to fly, Tanya could look forward to more leisurely rearrangements of her geographical position in the future. If nothing else, it was a relief to be out of the mud that accompanied the spring thaw. In the northeast, everything was still in the process of melting, but in the south, that part of the year had already come and gone. The southeast was also better populated, which meant better supply and communications networks. A piece of fresh meat was so near in her future Tanya could practically taste it. That evening, after they’d arrived and gotten situated into the new encampment and briefed, Tanya let Lieutenant Grantz take a company under his own command to act as artillery spotters. The guns needed to be calibrated in preparation for beginning the offensive in the morning, and she’d grown comfortable enough with her youngest company commander’s aptitude to assign him extra duties like that. Grantz was really coming into his own as an officer. Despite all the medals she’d earned, Tanya didn’t consider any of her famous battles, resulting in her now-infamous list of confirmed kills, her finest accomplishment. Nothing as economically harmful as decimating the working-age population deserved that title. More than anything else, she was proud of her selection and development of a few trustworthy people like Visha, and more recently, Grantz. Most commanders would have given up on him the first time they saw him quaking in his boots, but this was proof that with the right encouragement, people were capable of tremendous growth. Producing fine officers was one of the most critical tasks for an army. Personnel would be a natural fit for her, not least of all because it was done from a desk deep in an office in the capital. Tanya could only hope that one day, her true talents would be recognized, so she could join the league of men and women responsible for making sure that the Army only expended resources training the best of the best, like the commanding officer for her coming offensive. He’d left her deeply impressed. He was at least as old as General von Zettour, but age hadn't worn him down a bit. The Imperial Army truly was a wonderful institution, she reflected, thinking back to the man's marching orders. No matter the cost or difficulty, each local unit was to cover a minimum distance each day. It had been clear in the General's attitude that if the enemy didn't kill them, he would do so himself if his requirements were not met. Companies would be much more effective if they could be run this way, she thought, remembering all the time wasted on annual reviews. The amount of collective energy spent formulating ways to subtly tell underperforming team members they weren't meeting expectations was astounding. It was much better when you could take them to task at the first infraction. Honestly, who needs performance improvement plans? They were nothing but a cover for useless employees to take advantage of as they leeched more money away from stockholders. Just look at Lieutenant Grantz. If she had had to gently couch her criticisms in circuitous phrasing, would she have ever gotten through to him? No. The butt of a rifle into your solar plexus taught lessons that no lecture on employee responsibilities ever could. It would be nice if all executives went through military training, she found herself thinking. She quickly realized what had just drifted through her head. …Have I really grown to think this sort of thing is good? Am I really saying that being shoved into a war against my will has been a valuable life experience? She quickly shook her head to clear it. This damned thing needs to end before I forget what normal life is supposed to be like. Sleepiness always muddled the mind. She should get some rest. She didn’t often get the chance to turn in early, and the only artillery fire that she could hear was their own. Nothing better than that to provide white noise for dozing off. Sleep was easy to come by when you were perpetually short of it, so within minutes, Tanya was out. The next thing she knew, she was being awoken to the whistle that sounded promptly at 0600. The second thing she registered was the smell of strong coffee. She really ought to give Serebryakov a warning. Really. Definitely. She’d do it one day. Sleep was essential for a soldier. Tanya shouldn’t overlook that her adjutant was sacrificing a few minutes of valuable time every morning to wake up early and get a pot going. Then again - if she did that, she’d have to wake up without Visha’s coffee there to greet her. It was hot enough to scald, but Tanya ignored her adjutant’s warning and greedily gulped down half a cup before she got out of bed. Functioning taste buds were only important when you actually wanted to taste the food you were eating. K-Brot and tough meat went down easier when you couldn’t tell what they were. She fished through her things to find a clean pair of underclothes - her last pair, she belatedly realized. She’d have to make some time to do a little wash tonight. She had to hold her nose - often literally - and put up with a certain lack of hygiene on the battlefield, but there were limits. She’d get down on her knees and pray to Being X before she dressed herself in dirty garments. She’d be giving up her dignity one way or the other. She headed to the officers’ mess first thing for breakfast. She had just under an hour until she had to take flight. Food needed time to digest. Felled by an upset stomach? Her? After everything else she’d survived? She’d never live that down. Even after two cups of coffee, it took the sounds of the artillery bombardment commencing - specifically, the heavy guns - to shake off her lethargy fully and get her blood pumping. As the infantry began its advance under covering fire, the 203rd took to the air, keeping eyes out for enemy mages targeting their precious guns. The Federation forces could finally fly without bumbling through the air like stunned bees, so they had to be taken seriously as opponents. Whether this was a result of increased training or of a reduction in rations of vodka was the subject of vigorous mealtime debate. Tanya was betting on the latter herself. The Federation's biggest advantage was always in numbers. They could afford to have two men or more killed for every Imperial soldier. So, it came as no surprise when she heard the radioed warnings come in shortly past ten in the morning that they could expect enemy mages in force. "Two battalions from the south," came the alarm from the company furthest down the line. The Imperial Army had in total three battalions, spread into companies along the length of the advance. At better odds than one for one, the Imperial mages would have no trouble shattering the Federation. Tanya didn't have much faith in communism to promote the most able decision-makers to the top, but an attack this futile managed to be below her expectations. "Two battalions from the north," came another call several minutes later. Damn. The odds were more evened now. The Federation had an extra battalion, but they had neither the training nor technology to match the Imperial mages. We can still win, but we won't be able to provide any ground support until we do. Any infantry that runs into Federation artillery might be slowed down too much to keep the line steady, Tanya ruminated to herself, trying to decide what her best option was. The Federation was making a classic but effective pincer attack. If the Imperial mages split in two and peeled away from the center, it would leave it open and vulnerable. If they didn't, they risked the Federation overwhelming one or both of the flanks. "Two companies from the east," she heard Serebryakov announce from her company's position at the center. Looks like the choice had been taken away from them. Leaving the center open wasn't viable. Even taking into account the Federation's numerical superiority, four and a half battalions still seemed unexpectedly ambitious. They weren't holding anything back. No…they really aren't holding anything back, she thought, an idea coming to mind. They'd probably cleaned out every nearby garrison of mages. If she could get on the other side of the Federation, the skies would be clear. The cities that lay in the path of the advance likely had no air defenses remaining. If someone could take out the artillery surrounding the cities, they'd be ripe for the picking. The problem was, they were already at a disadvantage as far as numbers were concerned. Ordering any units towards another objective would only worsen their position. Still, if it could be done quickly enough…She made up her mind. With a little change in plans she could avoid what might amount to several days wasted trying to take the cities, time during which additional units might be called to aid. We don't need to win. We just need to not lose, she reminded herself. She quickly gave her orders. Let the Federation think their numbers had won. If they took the bait, it would be their undoing. Tanya didn't like leaving herself in the most dangerous position. But, she was a firm believer in things like labor specialization, and it so happened her battalion was the right one for the task, so she supposed she'd have to do it. The battalions on the edges of the formation intentionally broke rank in the face of the Federation's charge. They scattered randomly, with the intention of reforming further away. The Federation let themselves be hooked. A few gave chase, but the bulk of the forces pressed in towards Tanya in the center. Two battalions couldn't encircle four, so while the Federation mages kept a look out for a counter offensive, they allowed themselves to be drawn in. Tanya's own battalion rose to eight thousand feet. Even with the Type 95 in her hand, there was absolutely no way for a single battalion to win against four times their number, but so long as they didn't engage, they should be relatively safe. Unlike most forces, her battalion could avoid envelopment by moving upwards. The Federation mages weren't capable of meeting them at 8,000. And even if someone dares, he'll probably be shot by his own officer for showing too much individuality. A good Communist mustn't outshine his peers, Tanya laughed to herself. Her battalion led the Federation on a merry chase. The Russy mages weren't terrible, but at a minimum distance of 2,000 feet, it was difficult to hit a fast-moving target capable of using optical decoys as a distraction. Of course, Tanya’s own men faced the same limitation trying to fire back. They picked off enemies here and there, but largely all she wanted to do was hold their attention until the two friendly battalions could return. So long as they didn't have the leisure to begin destroying Imperial artillery, Tanya considered it a job well done. Unfortunately, due to the discrepancy in numbers, her battalion couldn't entirely prevent the Federation mages from getting off a few well-placed hits on the Empire's ground forces. She could only hope that the small sacrifice would pay off. After an hour and a half of glorified stalemate, her plan's success was radioed in. With little to no artillery left to protect them, several cities would fall under Imperial control effortlessly. She'd crippled the Federation's ability to defend them any more heavily than they would an open field. An army advancing beyond its supply lines was a dangerous thing. This would give them the ability to push onward quickly while morale was high. Now that they held the center and were, from a certain standpoint, winning, Tanya estimated the Federation mages would be loathe to give their advantage up. Traditional military thinking placed a high value on occupying the central position, and their enemy was still stuck a generation in the past when it came to maneuvers. They might be inclined to take more casualties before retreating than they otherwise would. There was no use trying to trap an army twice your size in the open air, so the two returning battalions formed up together and came at the Federation straight on. Well, I guess it's time to earn my keep too, Tanya thought, exchanging her beloved Type 97 for the cursed piece of trash she'd need for this skirmish. The numerical odds were still a bit difficult to manage, even accounting for the superior skills of the Imperial mages. She had faith that the Imperial Army could eventually win the battle in the air, but if they took too long at it, they might lose momentum on the ground as Federation artillery slowed the infantry advance. Even though she'd managed a stunning success while outnumbered, command would look for someone to blame if things didn't go as planned. She couldn't afford to be held liable for the offensive failing. The familiar haze overtook her mind as she made mincemeat of the men closest to her. The Federation mages dropped like flies under her hailstorm of potent spells. Once the numbers were in the Empire's favor, she withdrew her battalion and pushed them forwards. The other mages could do the job of slowly overtaking the enemy. She was going to go find some artillery of her own to destroy. She flew on, raining destruction down on enemy positions almost lazily now that there was no one to oppose her. She saw the Federation mages beat a hasty retreat after deciding they'd suffered enough losses, taking a few final shots at them for fun as they went by. When she came to, the last thing she remembered was ordering her men to engage. Presumably, they’d been successful, because she was now standing in the command post that had been newly established in a captured city, reviewing the updated plans for the continued drive eastward. She gave an internal sigh of relief when she saw Major Weiss at her side. As the night drew to a close, Tanya had Weiss announce the strategy to the rest of the unit, catching herself up on what she missed. Given today's success, the command had high hopes for pushing the front far back into Federation territory. Tanya went to bed resigned to several more weeks of dropping into bed exhausted and waking up merely tired. 




 

 What a tangled web we weave






 
 "Whenever a man does a thoroughly stupid thing, it is always from the noblest motives."
 
 May 9, 1927General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 Erich von Lehrgen’s office was small. So small he’d wondered more than once if whoever was in charge of assigning spaces in the office had it figured into the plan that a Colonel who was young enough he should be a Major wouldn’t realize he’d been stuck into a converted coat closet, or would notice, but wouldn’t feel it was his right to complain. It wasn’t far off from the truth. Every year the war dragged on and every new enemy swelled the ranks of the General Staff, to the point the building they used to laugh at for its grandiose profile – a palace for the real rulers of the country, some leftist rag had called it – had officers camped like vagrants in archival rooms, lines at the door for the men’s room, and a fully-functioning barber shop operating out of the basement. His job took him everywhere. Foreign countries, all fronts, over to the actual royal palace. Half of his paperwork was done on train rides, in the backs of cars, in chairs he’d been instructed to wait in. His meetings were held in tents, on walks through muddy trenches punctuated by pauses for the deafening death knells of heavy guns, and yes, in line for the men’s room, when the right people were there. And still, he had an office. With a window. A tiny one, but so long as he could see out of it, that was all he asked. It was his last refuge. That should have been his home, except lately when he was home for more than the time it took to brush his teeth and fall in bed half-dressed, all he could think about was what he might be doing if he were at the office instead. It was only there, ironically, at the office, in his own five square meters of space, that he felt justified in shutting the world out and daydreaming for a quarter of an hour, on those occasions he needed to remember why he was doing this in the first place. It was why he was in his chair most mornings by the time the clock struck six. Reading the newspaper over his breakfast table or sorting his files in his study, the back of his mind sent constant pangs of what if – what if he was missing an important call, what if there was something better to be doing, what if his presence made a difference. In his small office with its smaller window, he knew there wasn’t something else, or it would have interrupted. There was no shame in finding some tranquility in a perusal of the news, some calm in the quiet reordering of notes and maps and number tables. Everyone there before seven knew they were all at work so early for the same reason. There was an unspoken agreement not to disturb each other. When Rudersdorf had a new assignment for him, it materialized out of thin air after seven-thirty, and did not exist the second before the clock chimed out the official start of the day. Today was the rare day that the alternating ding-dong to mark they were halfway through the hour didn’t bring along with it one adjutant, two people hoping to catch him before anyone else got there, three phone calls, and the sound of countless boots tromping through the halls. Normally, that was as good a day as he got. Normally, the last voice he wanted to start his day to was shouting itself hoarse giving lethal orders hundreds of kilometers away. His door was partway open. The shrill call of his name went unmuffled. It was accompanied by knuckles rapping against wood, three knocks so evenly spaced they could have been made by a machine. He glanced at his clock. Eight exactly, almost to the second, right at the scheduled time. Reluctantly, his eyes snapped up to meet eyes blue ones. “Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff,” he acknowledged. She’d been recalled to the capital for a brief rest, though they’d told her it was to make an updated report in person. The last time she’d been asked if she needed a break, she’d obfuscated about her subordinates possibly being due for one. Getting her acquiescence had been worse than pulling teeth. Lehrgen had seen two possibilities with letting her forge on without rest: either she was overestimating herself, and she’d lose her life to a mistake, or she wasn’t, and they’d lose her, finally, completely, and wholly, as a soldier who obeyed commands and fought for something beyond personal gratification, after too long spent away from a semblance of normalcy. This time, it had seemed easier to lie and force the break on her for a fictitious reason than go through the process of getting her to agree it might be good for her. She stepped in as soon as he acknowledged her, waiting for him to wave a hand at the chair across from him before taking it. "Congratulations,” he continued, once she was comfortably seated. “I hear you haven’t lost a battle in months.” The reports that landed on his desk brimmed and burst with the lofty morale typical of field officers on a winning streak, unable to see much beyond the completed objectives behind them and future conquests on the horizon. The Federation’s line had been pushed back. Again. And again. And again the next time. It was a hundred kilometers from where it was the last time Degurechaff stood in front of him. She was responsible for dealing them the hand that took the first win on their winning streak, and she knew it. To soldiers on the front line, that looked like nothing but success. To someone who was briefed every day on logistics, it was yet another case of success tiring the Empire out as they sprinted the distance of a marathon. The eastern rail networks weren't built like the Empire's own, and neither the men nor money to improve them was readily available. Double-edged sword Degurechaff might be. One edge and the sharp point remained aimed at enemies. That was enough to earn a thank you, in his book. "Thank you, sir,” she said, inclining her head at the praise. “Should I offer you congratulations in return?" Her eyes assessed him like he was a favored toy that would make a sound she liked if she pressed the right part. Push the tentative praise button, out spits information on a confidential mission. Any congratulations for forward movement with Ildoa was credited more to her than to him. It was Imperial strength that was weighing the scales in their favor; his only job was not to mess up the presentation. Soon, he hoped, the Ildoans would sign something. First came the details. How they’d split captured territory. How many men the Empire would withdraw from the Southern Continent. A million smaller concerns, and then, hopefully, signatures. "That would be premature," he replied. Not wanting to let her push him for more on this topic, he moved on to the official purpose of their meeting. The commander of every theater was desperate enough to want Degurechaff and her unit’s assistance, no matter the drawbacks. In the absence of any obvious choice, out of respect for her ability to read the direction the war was going he'd called her in to let her have her pick. He handed over the stack of requests to her, then gave her a few minutes to read them. "Any preference on your next assignment?” he asked, as soon as she looked back up at him. “You aren't going to ask for rear-line duty again, I trust?" The debacle after her request from a year ago was something he hoped to never see repeated. Being stuck in between her and Zettour as the older man loosed his anger, enraged at her obstinate refusal to provide a satisfactory answer as to what she meant by it, had made him want to crawl under his desk and hide until it all blew over. She cracked a world-weary smile that didn't fit on a face as young as hers. "We both saw how asking for that went last time," she muttered, her expression drawing into a frown. "If you pass along a request like that again, it might put you in the line of fire with me. I'm not so short-sighted as to let a dependable ally fall out of good graces on my behalf." ...Ally? his mind screeched. Did she say ally? In what world were they allies? Aside from wearing the same uniform, few things could be further from the truth. "I'll do what I can to honor your wishes," he said, a noncommittal response if there ever was one. She gave a genuine smile at that. "I don't doubt it, sir." He paused for a breath, to scan her face for what little could be found there. A bit of warmth, a bit of satisfaction, a bit of trust. None of the hate, the anger, the arrogance that read so plain in every flash of her eyes and twitch of her muscles when that was her mood. He’d given her more reason to hate him than most. And yet there was no trace of it, like she really did think they were friends. "I don't believe I've been all too successful in altering the course of your career," he said truthfully, hoping she might volunteer what she thought he'd been doing. She dipped her head slightly in acknowledgement, her smile transforming into a wry one, like she found it all a bit pathetically hilarious. The look fit better on her face. "I can appreciate someone who has the conviction to do they think is necessary, no matter what anyone else says. I understand you've gotten some grief over trying to keep me out of the worst of it because I'm a young girl.” One of her hands went up to comb a piece of hair behind her ear, lips pursing into a slight frown. “I hope you haven’t found it a reason to doubt my abilities.” "You are an exceptionally talented soldier," he reassured her, before he let himself turn over the meaning of what she'd just said in his mind. Somehow, by some providential stroke of luck, no one had ever told her. She couldn’t see anything wrong with her actions; couldn’t even understand that he did. Her mind had gone and calculated up a reason that made sense to her, morality mixed with harmless paternalism. The solid wood behind and beneath him – cushioned chairs were in short supply – was all that stood between him and collapsing with relief. There were times he’d thought he might not want the war to end. Other enemies kept her attention off the one right next to her. His job stole first place in his mind when it started back up, like it always had the past few years. Use everything to your advantage, the soldier whispered, the ruthless practicality with which battles were won. They were battling, though she didn’t know it. And he had some of the same pieces – fewer, far fewer, but the same – of what he reviled in her lurking in him, though he hated to admit it. The part of him that wished they had nothing in common protested. He believed Degurechaff would eventually face consequences for taking that sort of behavior too far. He had to believe it. He couldn’t lie to himself that the same didn’t apply in his case. Tell her some version of the truth now, so it didn’t catch up with him later, when he was deeper into the fiction with no way out. His practical side won, as it had a tendency to these days. Now was not the time for personal grudges between officers. Tell the truth, and then what? Utter destruction of whatever working relationship they did have? Mutual distrust and enmity? At the exact moment they needed the entire nation to stand arm-in-arm without a crack? In for a penny, in for a pound, he told himself, fighting not to sigh, a phrase learned in his days stationed in the Commonwealth flitting through his mind. Whatever else Degurechaff was, she was smart. The professional mask slipped on occasion, when those terrible, wide smiles split her face open to bare her teeth. Her reaction to the Dacian invasion was delight, not dismay; she accepted the not-guilty verdict at her first court martial haughtily, not with humility. Most times, she controlled it better. She was smart enough to know she had to. They’d make her a hero for killing under orders. She was a criminal the first time she ignored that technicality. She trusted him to do the right thing. Against the odds, against the evidence, with no regard for danger, she trusted him. So if he told her the right thing was to let him see what was really under there, she just might believe him. "Colonel von Degurechaff," he said, trying his best to keep his tone and expression pleasant. "As soldiers, it's only natural to feel in conflict with our orders at times. I do hope you feel that you can be candid with me about which assignment you'd like. It's results that matter and I've yet to meet another soldier so capable of producing them. I'd hardly let your talents go to waste." Her gaze considered him carefully for too many moments. Skeptical. Wary. He wondered if the mention, bare as it was, that he thought there was more to her than perfect soldier had already put her on alert, overpowered brain ticking through possibilities, rewriting her assumption that they were friends, of a sort. She’d come to the realization soon enough. Better for him to come clean and get it over with. When he noticed her shoulders move, relaxing, not tensing, he stopped any damning words from spilling out of his mouth. He’d taken the most nerve-wracking test of his life with no preparation. And he’d passed. xXx As soon as Tanya relaxed the hard stare she’d given her boss, he did the same. Doubtless he was worried she was going to turn the tables on him and report his less-than-patriotic chit-chat to his own superiors. In reality, she’d been searching for a clue as to what kind of response he was looking for. His comment could have been a test – in a petulant fit of anger after her second court martial, she’d indicated that if her leadership was so averse to her methods of executing their orders she’d prefer to take herself out of the fray; Lehrgen, therefore, had good reason to wonder if she was as patriotic as she played at, and could be looking to gauge her loyalty after a few long months in the field. In that case, she’d be expected to answer that she was happy to go right back at it, and select a suitably ambitious next assignment to prove it. Ultimately, she’d decided the other way: her boss was making an earnest attempt to look out for her best interests. This was Colonel von Lehrgen she was talking about. He was as serious as they came, which meant a full smile wasn’t on his face very often. Its presence either meant he was getting a real thrill out of trying to trick her – odd for a man who’d risked his career for her benefit – or that he was encouraging her to select the safest assignment available so they could both breathe easy, for once. Now that she’d determined that, Tanya spent another minute pretending to look at the papers in front of her once again to give herself time for a very necessary mental beatdown. While it might have turned out to her benefit in this case, there was no denying she’d slipped up enough to cause Lehrgen to treat her differently. Initially, her main concern had been that Lehrgen was on the verge of giving up on his efforts to help her because they weren’t getting anywhere. Her philosophical opinion on fruitless labor aside, as long as she wasn’t the one doing it, she was perfectly happy for someone to continue to do it on her behalf. Lehrgen’s beneficence represented a miniscule chance of her getting off the front. It was a chance, nonetheless. To that end, Tanya had calculated that a show of appreciation and highlighting her outward youth would keep the guilt, and thus the favors, flowing. As it turned out, that had been all Lehrgen needed to get a glimpse behind her shows of bravery. Immediately afterwards, there they were discussing getting candid about not liking her orders. Thankfully, Lehrgen wasn’t the average officer, in which case having her will to fight questioned might have stuck her with orders she’d like even less, to teach her a lesson on being grateful for the preferential treatment she’d so far enjoyed. She was dealing with the rare man in the Imperial Army that wasn’t lacking for shame when it came to sending children off to die in combat. With that in mind, Tanya had managed to keep her cool and not jump out of her seat to deny the whiff of cowardice. A bit of weight lifted off her shoulders knowing she wasn’t on the hook for pretending to be excited about risking her life. That being said, they were soldiers, and Tanya respected that Lehrgen had his own job to do. Giving an answer like Please make sure I never have to hold a gun again in my life wasn’t an option. He might be willing to forgive a little natural fear, but a part that didn't do what it was designed for had no destiny except the trash heap. He was telling her he was alright if she picked an assignment that wasn't a suicide mission, not asking if she wanted to quit the Army altogether. Still, she’d be able to exercise a bit of flexibility. She could assess the opportunities in front of her fairly on the basis of what was best, without needing to bring in the messy question of what would look best for her to choose. It was a real relief to finally have a boss that saw beyond the ostentation and bluster required of soldiers, who assessed his subordinates on their measurable skills. Coming up through Personnel as he did, Tanya shouldn’t have been surprised. If HR taught you anything, it was that at the end of the day, everyone was in the job to get paid, and that type of selfishness wasn’t something to be held against people – it was to be leveraged to further the company’s goals. From what Lehrgen had said about results and not wasting talent, she could infer they were on the same page, or close enough not to worry over the details. So long as he recognized her organizational value as lying in her stellar outcomes, and not in her motivations for achieving them, it was the best news she could hope for. Tanya – or anyone, really – could work successfully and happily under a framework like that. Clear expectations were the foundation of mutual satisfaction. As long as she proved her worth, he could turn a blind eye to some lack of enthusiasm. A fair deal. Her biggest regret at the moment was that she couldn’t open Lehrgen’s mind any further on the subject. Out of everyone she knew, she could see the two of them having a good time discussing the confluence of market principles and human behavior. It was a shame to imagine, but all her books on it had probably ended up going out with the burnable garbage. Ahh well. If she was going to ask a favor from Being X, she had a few more choice ones in mind than sending her copies of unpublished books. But maybe, she could ask for one tiny favor from her superior officer – to listen to an idea for her next assignment without immediately issuing a formal reprimand for trying to avoid danger. Avoid crossing too much further over the boundary into unsoldierly thoughts, and she should be fine. xXx Lehrgen would confess to being slightly at a loss. Until a minute ago, he'd never seen Degurechaff at anything less than full attention. Even if she was sitting, her back was so straight it was like she had an iron rod in place of a spine. But moments before, she'd shifted into a more casual position, leaning back against her chair like a great weight had come off her shoulders. Does she really need someone to confess all her sinister desires to that badly? Lehrgen wondered with worry. After this was all over, he might need psychiatric help himself. There was no way that listening to her unfiltered opinions wouldn't eventually drive him at least slightly mad. "So," he said, clearing his throat to continue the conversation, "what sort of role would you prefer to have?" "I'd take your job if I could," Degurechaff replied, with a little laugh. Was she…threatening him? Maybe she had no reason to specifically hate him, but he doubted that would stop her if she felt he was in her way. If she wanted more power to direct the war to grow until it consumed the few countries of Europa still untouched by it, taking his position, directly under General von Rudersdorf, would give it to her. "Training," she amended, after a short pause. "Training? You want me to recommend the most effective group of soldiers in this entire army as an instructing unit?" Lehrgen asked in disbelief. She was definitely trying to get him removed from the General Staff, if not dishonorably discharged from the Army itself. She stiffened up again and he remembered that he had to play at accommodating her. "If you can come up with a reason that sounds plausible, I'm willing to consider it," he relented. "The problem is precisely that my unit is so effective," she said steadily, looking him in the eye. Actually, that's true, Lehrgen thought, wanting to frown. Taking her off the front might slow the pace of any advances back down into a more sustainable rate. "Go on," he encouraged. "It's unsustainable to have to rely on a single battalion. If we want to effectively make use of my Kampfgruppe idea, we'll need other commanders and other units capable of forming them." He had to concede she had a point there. "You'd like to train other aerial mage units to do the same," he concluded. "I'd like to recommend that Captain Weiss be in charge of leading the 203rd while training the other mages. He has proven to be capable of command," she replied. After meeting Weiss, Lehrgen could agree that the man had talent, but if Weiss was leading the training, that left the officer in front of him with nothing to do. "And if that is assigned to him, what will you be doing?" he asked. "You can't always expect mages to form the core of the Kampfgruppen, there aren't enough of us. I will oversee the instruction of any non-mage units who are thought to be likely prospects," she responded promptly. Odd, Lehrgen thought, pondering over it. That will take her far away from the front lines. Mages were in scarce supply so were often close to action even when at rest, but other troops were rotated away from the front as often as possible to avoid fatigue. "Your proposal has merits," he told her, "though I'm still not sure now is the time for this." "Sir, if I may, if not now, then when? What use is there until waiting until the war is over? Events are going in our favor for now, should we not take advantage of the lull?" She was right, she was right, of course she was right, it seemed like she was always right. "I will support your proposal, then. Though I can't promise you won't be pulled from training immediately if the situation changes," he warned. "Understood, sir. I think I have demonstrated that my unit is capable of being called up at a moment's notice," she said, a touch of pride leaking into her voice. "You should receive your orders within the week. Dismissed." She stood, and with a precise salute she turned on her heel and strode out. He was left to wonder over why she would willingly put herself in a position so far from any action. Maybe she's growing up, he mused. Maybe what had seemed like a game to a child was no longer so entertaining now that she understood what she was involved in. But had she ever given any indication she wasn't completely cognizant of the reality? She'd never been childish in the first place. No, he thought, shaking his head. More likely, her patriotic bent was getting ahead of any other thoughts. An Imperial victory over the Federation, and from there who knew how far she'd like them to conquer onwards. He lit a cigarette and tried to drop his train of thought. Everyone else seemed to accept that she was abnormal and move on without giving it further consideration. He should try to do the same.     




 

 Everyone report to the dance floor






 
 "I never travel without my diary. One should always have something sensational to read on the train."
 
 July 11, 1927General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 
 If there was one thing that every officer above the rank of major on the General Staff could agree on, it was that unexpected phone calls never brought good news. Never. It might seem like a statistical impossibility in a nation that had successfully waged war for over four years, a country which now occupied so much enemy territory it had practically doubled in size. But somehow, good news was always shouted down the hall or brought by an adjutant. Bad news, on the other hand, would wait until you picked up the phone to let you know what it was. So, when his own adjutant came to inform him that Lieutenant General von Romel was on the line, Colonel von Lehrgen already knew it wasn't to share good tidings. In fact, the conversation was liable to be downright unpleasant. Romel was known for many things, but an easygoing nature was not one of them. He was a man with little patience and less tact. Lehrgen got along fine with him so far as they knew each other, but that didn't mean Romel wouldn't give him an earful. Degurechaff had been sent down to join the lieutenant general on the Southern Continent some two weeks prior. Negotiations were finally closing with the Ildoans, but before they signed off on anything, they wanted a first-hand look at the situation. Lehrgen had tasked Degurechaff with showing it to them. It was imperative to convince Ildoa of their proposed ally's strength, and he could think of no unit that exuded an air of invincibility the way that hers did. Granted, it was all for show. There were no battles planned, simply some audacious training maneuvers that would give the Ildoans something to be amazed by. Romel was probably calling to complain about how useless his favorite feral pet was now that she had to play nice for diplomacy's sake. As soon as Lehrgen picked up the receiver, Romel's uncharacteristically festive mood engendered an ominous feeling in his gut. The summer months in the desert tended to see the least amount of action, and thus very little cause for celebration. With a low chance of anything besides a minor skirmish, there had seemed no safer time to send an observation party. "Congratulations, Colonel," came through the line. Lehrgen began to dread the rest of the conversation. Something must have gone much differently than planned if he was getting unsolicited praise from one of the army's toughest commanders. "You've figured out how to use Degurechaff to her full potential," Romel continued. "Letting her choose how to fight her own battles is the right way of doing it. Restricting her with too many orders never ends well." Something was definitely wrong. Seriously wrong, in fact. Nothing about his orders to guide a few friendly spectators around to help them understand the current positions suggested that Degurechaff should do anything close to her full potential. No one wanted a reckless ally. Lehrgen pinched the bridge of his nose as Romel continued talking. The Republic had been trapped and forced to evacuate over the water as far back as Sfaqes. There was little military value in the territory south of the city, but it would give the Empire breathing room now that they possessed more than a foothold above the Sahara. No one could argue it wasn't a major victory. But being brought along on a mission of any range during the middle of the day in the dead heat of summer, skirting the edge of a passing sandstorm as cover, was the exact opposite of how he'd intended the Ildoans to be treated. As usual, the casualties were surprisingly low given what Degurechaff had accomplished, but any casualties at all among the Ildoan observers was a problem. They were hesitant enough as it stood. Had he not been specific enough when he'd told her to treat them gently? No, it's my own fault, Lehrgen groaned to himself, recalling the exact words he'd used. To anyone else, "treat them like they're our own" would have conveyed the appropriate message - be careful with them - but to her, treating troops like her own meant casual and repeated near-death encounters on raids that sounded impossible to anyone that didn't know her. At least he hadn't said to treat them like family. Given that she was an orphan, she'd probably have interpreted it as a coded message that he wanted the Ildoans dead. He couldn't even bring himself to be angry with her over it. He should have known better. Trying to reprimand her over it would only result in her being confused. In her mind, she surely thought she'd followed her orders to the letter. He'd told her to impress them. Whether they were impressed by her formidable ability to outmaneuver enemies or impressed by how little she cared about the sanctity of human life remained to be seen. Lehrgen sighed and picked up his phone again. Hopefully, Mrs. Schneider would be free to accompany Mr. Schneider on a summer holiday back to Ildoa so that Mr. Schneider could beg his guests' forgiveness for letting the family dog bite them. Intelligence gave Elya the go-ahead, and they were on a train the next morning. This time, instead of asking after his secrets, the woman who accompanied him shared no few that didn't rightly belong to her. She wasn't shy about disclosing her own either. Apparently, his companion was allergic to silence. To fill the time, most of the ride was filled with an almost unceasing recounting of her personal life. By the end, Lehrgen thought he might know more about her than he did about himself. Once they'd covered that topic sufficiently, Elya had drawn a few notebooks out of the designer bag that, according to her personal history, she'd bought as a souvenir in Parisee. The journals weren't old, but were already well-worn, the pages crinkled so that they no longer lay flat. In small, crowded writing she'd recorded an extensive array of information on the private lives of anyone remotely notable in Ruma. More than that, she gave a recounting of deeds no one wanted publicly known about themselves. Antonio Messe, tax evasion. Not terribly uncommon, except in the amount of revenue he'd managed to hide from the government. Vittorio Graziani, bribery of judges. Also a somewhat common practice in Ruma's political scene. Neither of those was likely to elicit much of a response. Then, she got to the salacious stuff. Vittorio Graziani, drug trafficking. Luigi Dallolio, human trafficking. Pietro Boselli, several affairs with the wives of other politicians. Silvio Berluscone, the daughters of other politicians. Briefly, Lehrgen wondered what damning information Elya had on notable names from Preussland, but ultimately, he decided it was best not to ask. There were no pleasant surprises found in her notes. If it turned out that his brother was in fact his half-brother, as the pages in front of him suggested was more common than you'd think, he'd lived almost thirty-four years not knowing that, and he was prepared to live another thirty-four not knowing it either. On the other hand, if a certain Ildoan politician by the name of Alfredo D'Annunzio, who Lehrgen knew would jump at any excuse to derail the alliance, didn't want his fondness for the young men working as his aides to be the subject of tomorrow's morning edition, it would be best if he kept his mouth shut and voted in favor of the agreement. He'd let Elya determine how to discreetly make that known. Lehrgen's only official point of contact was Signor Boroni, whose company he'd grown to enjoy. He wouldn't want to ruin their camaraderie by making the man pass along threats. His initial impression was that Ildoa needed no reassurance. Elya reported back that there were already signs they were mobilizing. They must have decided that when it came to Degurechaff's brutal efficiency, "efficient" was the part to concentrate on. A few days into his stay, Boroni owned up to the real reason. "I should not tell you this, my friend," Boroni sighed, lighting a cigar. "But you don't complain when I talk too much about my mother-in-law. Everyone else tells me theirs is worse. You don't have one. And besides, I know that girl of yours knows things about me." Lehrgen put his fork down. It wasn't a mealtime, but he hadn't been able to help himself when a plate of fresh fruit had been brought in mid-morning. "They didn't tell me in advance," he continued, gaze souring. "It's easier to make friends when you don't think you're lying to them." Lehrgen pulled out a cigarette from his pocket to preempt whatever bad news he was about to hear. "With how quickly you're advancing down south, all the politicians think you have your eyes on the prize." "We'd much rather leave Turus for you to take," Lehrgen placated, though he wasn't entirely sure that was true. It was better than letting the Ildoans think there'd be nothing left for them to claim after they joined the war, the crown jewel they coveted in the hands of another power. "But if you're focused there, it makes one wonder if you've taken your eyes off somewhere you consider safe," Boroni finished, eyeing the map on the table. Lehrgen didn't need to look to know what he meant by that, to know that he wouldn't be able to finish another bite of fruit. Unredeemed Ildoa had always been a minor point of contention between their countries, but Ildoa had no hope of winning it from the Empire in a one-on-one war. Now, though, with more powerful enemies providing cover for them, it could be their chance. "And if we promised a fair plebiscite after the war?" Boroni opened his hands expansively. "Of course, we would take that into consideration." "Then you'll excuse me for the day," Lehrgen replied, pushing his chair back to rise. First, he found Elya, to have her gather as much information as she could about the specifics of their military strength, and to figure out who the main instigators of this turnaround in events was. If a few key players could be pressured into changing their minds, that might be all that was necessary. As soon as he was done with that, he sent an encoded message home, asking for permission to make such a promise. Lehrgen knew it wasn't Degurechaff's fault, exactly, that the government left him waiting weeks for a response. Politicians didn't tend to make decisions quickly, so it was only natural that he was stuck down there while they debated. Spring in Ruma had been a pleasant affair of breezy days and cool nights. Rain had been occasional, but there was no more of it than there was at home. The end of summer was oppressive in its heat, the days filled with a beating, unrelenting sun. The nights offered little relief. The humidity turned the air into a heavy blanket of suffocating stillness. An evening stroll under the trees lining the river could only be undertaken if the walker was unbothered by the odor of rotting vegetation and old fish. The scent of rancid garbage emanated from even the smallest alleyway. Temporary respite could only be found in restaurants and cafés, where the smell of exquisite food and coffee overpowered all else. The residents of Ruma took their dinners after the sun had left the sky and the heat of the day had somewhat abated. It was a sensible adaptation to the climate, but it meant that an open window at night was an invitation for the noise of the ebullient city to invade. Even children could be heard playing in the streets past midnight. Lehrgen knew he couldn't blame Degurechaff for it. But after somewhere around his eleventh night in a row tossing in bed and swearing never to spend summer south of the Alps again, it became hard not to. When he got the letter ordering him home, he would have given anything to stay. Home could only mean one thing. There was no future of negotiations with Ildoa. "Do the politicians not consider it a real threat?" Lehrgen asked General von Rudersdorf, pacing in front of the other man's desk instead of taking the chair that was offered. "Lieutenant Weber's intelligence confirms what I was told by my contact. She managed to scare enough of them back into neutrality, but if things get worse for us..." "Our Slovanian territory is protected by mountains," Rudersdorf sighed. "The consensus is that we can hold off the Ildoans with the small garrison we have stationed there. Beat the Federation and we could turn around on them before they've done any serious damage." "And then what, Ugoslavija decides it's time to take Kroatia because we can't be bothered to defend our own territory properly anymore?" he snapped. "You don't have to tell me," Rudersdorf placated. "Apologies, sir," Lehrgen replied, swallowing his anger. His superior gave another sigh. "Problem is, each time we've mentioned we're getting too thin, we always manage to pull out another win. I'm not sure the Reichstag believes us anymore when we claim we can't do it." It was a fight not to slam the door on the way out as Lehrgen went back to his office to pray that the assault being planned on Stalyngrad would cripple the Federation's strength enough to keep peace in the south. 
 August 15, 1927General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 
 The next time he saw Degurechaff was in his office, with a sunny smile on her face. "Were our friends impressed?" she asked, the first thing out of her mouth after their perfunctory greetings. Lehrgen thought about delivering the lecture he'd dreamt up after suffering through countless nights of troubled sleep. He'd told her off a thousand times already in his head. That will have to be good enough, he told himself. If he spoiled her good attitude towards him, he was positive she'd find a way of making him suffer for it. From the reports about her month training the 203rd, she derived an unseemly amount of glee out of torment. "Not exactly the way I intended. But the Kaiser was," Lehrgen sighed, picking up the envelope containing information on her next assignment. She was back in the capital because she'd turned out to be a surprisingly effective teacher. Her battalion remained in the south with Romel, but she'd been recalled to take up her training post as well as serve a stint as guest instructor at the War College. The General Staff was eager for her to produce as many officers as she could who were capable of following her model of rapid, independent action. Her students, most of whom were at least twice her age, all lived in mortal fear of her, but so far, there were no attempted murders. Degurechaff had stepped closer, and she glanced down as she took the envelope from him. Her face morphed into disappointment at catching sight of the article he was reading in his copy of The Times. A grainy photo of her in Arene, an extracted record from a Republican soldier's computation orb, graced the page. "They can hardly fault a soldier for following orders," she muttered sullenly. In most cases, Lehrgen would entirely agree. Directly disobeying objectionable orders was classed under the heading of things easier said than done. But she hadn't raised a single complaint. The corps commander that had delivered the orders to her had come to confide in Lehrgen later over how badly her calm attitude towards the ordeal had shaken him. She'd apparently even smiled when he'd given her the news. "Let's hope it doesn't happen again," he replied, as a means of avoiding explicitly agreeing with her. "You don't think there will be any trouble over it after the war, do you, sir?" "Not if we win," he said, "and if we don't, the Reichsgericht ruled in favor of the War College's interpretation of that particular law." "That's no guarantee an international tribunal would rule the same," she replied. "It's not," he agreed. "Especially if it comes to light you presented the original argument. But I've read the brief myself. It's quite…convincing." The legal case was so convincing, in fact, that Lehrgen had needed to remind himself numerous times that it was Degurechaff herself who'd made those tragic orders possible. "I simply presented an academic argument, sir." As someone who enjoyed theoretical debate himself, he was loathe to criticize the practice. But she'd presented her thesis to a War College instructor while her country was at war. Only an idiot would hand a loaded gun to someone already involved in a fistfight and not realize they might use it. And whatever else she was, Degurechaff was not an idiot. "May I ask where you found a copy of the brief so that I might see it for myself?" she continued. Lehrgen shook his head. "I knew someone who worked on the case," he said, by way of explanation. His acquaintance had been so impressed by Degurechaff's paper that Lehrgen was half-afraid the man was going to launch a public movement to allow women to practice law over it. Not that he minded in theory, but under no circumstances did he want the girl in front of him licensed. She might decide one day it would be fun to see just how many laws she could render meaningless via loopholes. Degurechaff's head perked up momentarily, but she gave a nod, a salute, and then left without further comment. xXx Walking into work with a smile on a Monday morning wasn't something most employees could do without forcing it. For Tanya von Degurechaff, the event was rarer still. Perhaps if she regularly got weekends off, she'd be able to face the start of the work week with a grin more often. But a day like today deserved her very best. First and foremost, her dependable superior officer had made good on his promise to respect her wishes when it came to her assignments. Her only enemy for the next few weeks would be overambitious students keeping her after class and cutting into her vacation time. The second piece of good news was that her prospects for after the war were looking up. She'd considered a legal career for future employment, so if one of her closest associates was acquainted with a high-up judge, that could be counted as a foot already in the door. So long as the antiquated laws on who could and couldn't practice law were revised in the aftermath of the war, she'd have a degree that promised a cushy job in no less than ten years' time. She shouldn't have overlooked the possibility that Lehrgen might have some useful connections outside the Army. He had been the one to help install the new Empire-friendly government in Lietuva. You couldn't do something like that without moving in the right circles. And for once, fate was smiling kindly down on her. Networking for another job while in the office was a bit crass, but there was no rule saying you couldn't have an informal chat over lunch. Two days later, she ran into Lehrgen at her favorite café. Naturally, he accepted the offer for a seat at her table instead of standing in line. She eased into the conversation and let him pick the subject to begin with. The key to networking, at least to start off, was not to let the other party know you were networking. The minute they sensed you were being friendly for ulterior motives, it was a huge turn-off. When they became comfortable that your presence was genuine companionship, that was the moment to strike. Partway through the meal, an opportunity finally presented itself. Nothing too strong from her part, of course. Just an innocent show of curiosity. "About the law, it's a fascinating subject to study, don't you think?" she began. Lehrgen seemed a bit startled at the turn the conversation took, but a comment like that wasn't enough to arouse suspicion. "I guess that's true," he replied. "Is there anything in particular you're interested in?" "I started off with a focus on regulations," she answered, with some honesty. Getting too political could be dangerous, but the General Staff had even more severe views than her own on that subject. Her service record was a testament to their commitment to not giving their employees paid holidays. Their take on child labor laws didn't even need to be touched on. "Truthfully, I think there's a lot of restrictions that I could live without." Lehrgen made a face at his food. Even officers like the two of them were eating poorly these days, so the taste was never very good. "Is that so?" he asked. "It's something I'd love to talk to an expert on. There's only so much you can learn from reading." "...that's true. I'm not sure I could be of much help. Besides military law, I'm not very familiar with the subject." "In that case, I wouldn't mind debating you on it one day, sir," she offered, an easy transition into what she really wanted to say. "Though come to think of it, didn't you know someone in the field?" "His specialty is international law." Even better. Getting in touch with a person like that would be more than a mere career move. They didn't have too long until nuclear fission would be discovered, and by then, it might be too late to prevent an arms race. Someone had to be the one to propose a ban on turning the technology into a weapon. A top-class judge in international law wouldn't be the worst person to have the ear of. "Oh, that's much more exciting," Tanya replied, giving her best smile to her lunchmate. "It's the most complex of all. There's no international body capable of enforcement, so it all comes down to persuading other countries to see things your way." Lehrgen bumped his chest twice with his fist like the dried out meat had stuck in his throat. "Ah, well, with the war going on, I'm afraid he must be very busy." It was a bit disappointing, but it wasn't a firm no. As soon as the geopolitical scene quieted down some, she could bring it up again. To her surprise, Lehrgen pushed his half-full plate of food away. "Is everything alright, sir?" The menu had gone downhill in the past year, but she didn't think they'd gotten so desperate as to serve anything spoiled. Just in case she needed to stop eating her own meal partway through, she should check if there was a reason. "There's some days I find it hard to eat much," he replied with a grimace. Now that was something Tanya could sympathize with. On the front, she had a reason to stuff herself as full as she could - she'd need those calories to replenish her mana. But with the quality of meals suffering due to the blockades, it didn't inspire an office worker to eat more than necessary. "To tell you the truth, sir, I can't work up a full appetite unless I'm heading to battle either." Ahh, that might have been a little heavy, Tanya sighed, seeing the pained look on his face. She'd have to read the atmosphere better next time. 
 September 20, 1927General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 
 Tomorrow, Lehrgen repeated to himself, looking across his desk at the calendar. She'll be gone tomorrow. Degurechaff was due for departure back to the Southern Continent. His meals would finally be peaceable again. After that first disaster, she'd managed to interrupt his lunch no fewer than four more times. And to rub salt in the wound, he'd been forced to pay for her on top of it. Every time a waiter caught sight of her pulling out her wallet, he would stare at Lehrgen like he was the lowest form of life on the planet. If Degurechaff was a typical fourteen-year-old girl who wanted to talk about dresses or something, he might not have minded paying for her. He'd never taken much of a liking to fashion, but by their third meal together, he'd briefly closed his eyes and prayed for that to be her topic of choice. At least then he'd just have been bored and not disturbed. On that subject, he had one more order of business to take care of before she left. He caught up with her in the hall as she returned from a meeting, hoping it would be the last he'd see of her for a few weeks. "Your request to give your unit a week's reprieve before the next offensive was approved," he told her, starting off with business. Aside, possibly, from Degurechaff, all the other members of the 203rd were human. A common soldier might be able to perform passably well when exhausted, but magic calculations required mental acuity. Their commander might have managed to teach them how to work under poor conditions, but even then it had only been a month spent operating above capacity. The 203rd was going on half a year. "And," Lehrgen continued, pulling an embossed envelope from his papers, "you've managed to earn an invite to the ball the royal family funds for the Kaiserin's birthday." "It seems a bit out of touch in the middle of a war," she said, taking the invitation from his hand. "It's not nearly as extravagant as it used to be. And there is value in putting on a show of normalcy," he countered. "I suppose you're right," she said, but shook her head anyway. "I won't be missed at an event of that size." "You can't turn this down, Lieutenant Colonel." "I'll be busy with work." "You'll be on holiday." "It will be the next to last night, so I'll have to look at the plans for when we're back to the Southern Continent to see if updates need to be made." Is working the only thing she knows how to do? Lehrgen wondered with exasperation. She was acting like taking a night off from plotting out new ways of killing people was the end of the world. Realistically, he'd be perfectly fine with her not attending. The thought of her speaking directly to politicians was stomach-turning. But whoever had put her name on the list would not forget the slight. This was not an invite typically extended to an officer of her rank who hadn't been born into the right family. It would end up reflecting poorly back on him if she failed to make an appearance. "For your own future, it's best if you go," he emphasized. "Alright, sir. I'll be there," she said, with a heavy sigh. "May I ask why work sounds so much more appealing?" "I haven't had the time to acquire the skill set for such events," she said, breaking eye contact and looking down. "I hope no one expects me to dance." Now there's a funny thought. It was hard not to laugh, though when his amusement faded, it was replaced by a twinge of guilt. From the way she was staring at the floor and fidgeting, he suspected she was telling him the truth. She'd be out of her element and was nervous about making a fool out of herself. A perfectly normal reason. "You get to bring someone along with you, so you won't be alone," he reassured her. She considered for a moment. "I think Lieutenant Serebryakov would enjoy the chance to attend," she mused. "Major Weiss might be a more orthodox choice," Lehrgen countered. It could be overlooked due to her age, but bringing along another woman would turn a few heads. "I can take Serebryakov if you'd like." Her eyes narrowed in obvious distrust. The one time he was trying to help her, and she thought his motives suspect. He had a free ticket himself, and had simply figured it would be easier on everyone if Degurechaff had someone there to guide her. "I'll hand her off to you as soon as we're there," he soothed. "Thank you, sir," she intoned politely. "I would appreciate it." "Consider it done. Though if you don't mind, please pass the invite along to her on my behalf." "Sir, will I need to wear all my decorations on my dress uniform?" she asked. "They can be a bit...much." If she didn't even know that one wore a dress, and not a dress uniform, to a ball, she'd be even more out of depth than he thought. "Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff." "Yes, sir?" "You do realize this isn't a military event?" "Yes, sir," she replied evenly. "Your dress uniform is not appropriate attire." "I don't own any dresses," she said flatly. "Do you wear nothing but your uniform?" "No, sir." He sighed. He should have expected that answer. But really, what sort of girl was she? "Then you'll have to buy one. And this should go without saying, but you can't wear your boots underneath it." 
 October 22, 1927Hotel Esplanade, Imperial Capital Berun
 
 Payback. This is definitely payback, Tanya groaned, wincing slightly as another pin slid through her hair, scraping along her scalp. "Just a few more, Lieutenant Colonel," her torturer told her. "Then it's on to makeup." The situation was dire enough without her adjutant finding a way to get back at her for putting her through the 203rd's special training. Normally, Tanya wouldn't have passed up the chance to build connections, but if there was one thing worse than leaving no impression, it was leaving a bad one. For that reason, she'd enlisted Visha's help when it came to the details of her appearance. Her friend had taken some liberties with Tanya's request to look polished and presentable. One of the other woman's good points was her willingness to go above and beyond the call of duty, but at this point, she was just having fun at Tanya's expense. She was smiling too much for someone who wasn't enjoying what she was doing. Foolishly, she'd thought that by including Visha in the upcoming event, she was doing herself a favor. Anyone looking in her direction for a dance partner would approach the older woman instead. On top of that, she could reward one of her most valuable subordinates with no skin off her back. It had been a win-win situation up until an entire magazine of hairpins was unloaded against her. From the way Visha was smoothing down a few errant strands of hair, they'd be moving on to the next stage of torture momentarily. "Close your eyes," Visha instructed. As soon as Tanya obeyed, her face was hit with a puff of powder. "Not too much," her adjutant continued, humming contentedly to herself. "At your age, you don't want to look like you're trying too hard to get attention." Honestly, with Visha by her side, Tanya wasn't all that concerned about attracting too much attention. She would admit to having some concerns about her adjutant on that front, though. She would be twenty soon, but she could still be naïve when it came to certain subjects. Unless Tanya wanted the trouble of dealing with the other woman sniffling over a broken heart because someone was only interested in her for a night instead of for the long term, she'd have to keep her eye out. She didn't think her boss was that type of guy, but there was no such thing as being too careful. "All done," Visha said, using her thumbnail to wipe a bit of lipstick that had strayed out of bounds. She turned Tanya around to face the mirror. "So pretty," she murmured. "Don't say it like that," Tanya grumbled back. She didn't want her adjutant getting any ideas about playing dress up again. And - well, it wasn't like there was something wrong if Visha was impressed by her appearance. In any world, being attractive always earned you bonus points. But "pretty little girl" wasn't exactly the impression she was hoping to leave tonight. xXx His recent trips to Ildoa aside, Colonel Erich von Lehrgen would grudgingly accede to having one thing in common with Tanya von Degurechaff - he'd gotten as little use out of his closet full of daily attire in the past year as she had out of her nonexistent one. Even when off-duty, slipping into uniform had become a habit. Despite this, the hands occupied by tying white silk around his throat were so practiced at the art of making a bowtie they operated on their own with an automatic efficiency. The Empire's eastern estate-holders weren't known for their sumptuous lifestyles, unlike their ennobled cousins in the west or their counterparts in the Commonwealth. They were a more austere bunch. Nevertheless, he'd been required to attend certain social functions for the better part of his life. In fact, he'd prefer not to think about how many years it was now that he'd been attending this particular event. He met his partner for the event at her hotel. Despite being a military woman, she was refreshingly normal off-the-clock. Both Elya and Degurechaff left something to be desired as far as personally was concerned. "Thank you again for bringing me along," Serebryakov said, halfway through the drive. "I'm sure Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff appreciates it as well. She's not so comfortable with events like this." "I noticed," Lehrgen smiled. "Shopping with her was…ahh…very interesting," she continued. "I never thought I'd meet a girl who hates looking pretty as much as she does. You'll barely recognize her. I made her look a proper lady," she said, clearly pleased with her effort. He mused that corralling Degurechaff into a dress and shoes and makeup and styled hair had probably been more difficult than most battles she'd fought. It was no wonder she was proud of her work. Within minutes of arriving, he spotted Degurechaff encamped in a corner of the room, and, as promised, escorted her adjutant over to her. Her words were polite when she greeted him. Her smile was pleasant, if forced. But, while Serebryakov had been rather successful in making Tanya look like a regular girl, as soon as she caught his eye, there was no question in his mind that she was even more terrifying out of uniform. She had expressive eyes. And dressed to kill took on a whole different meaning when the look in them screamed that she'd murder everyone responsible for putting her there if she could get away with it. As one of the guilty parties, a chill went down his spine. This isn't my fault, he sighed, wanting to shake her by the shoulders until she saw sense. Do you see any women here that aren't wearing dresses? Did you want me to let you embarrass yourself? In spite of every attempt he made to catch up with friends and acquaintances outside the Army, inevitably, one of his coworkers would find him and distract him every twenty minutes or so. Two hours and several glasses of wine into the night, it was General von Romel's turn. By unfortunate circumstance, the man was now convinced that Lehrgen took the same approach to managing Degurechaff as he did, and he'd come over to heap praise on his favorite subordinate officer. "Wait," Romel said, interrupting what Lehrgen had been saying and pointing over his shoulder with a look of amusement. "Get a look at this." Lehrgen turned to see. Major Weiss, evidently well-inebriated, was dragging Tanya away from her conversation partner and out towards where everyone was dancing. Please don't make a scene, he willed her mentally. He hadn't expected her to be good at it, necessarily, but she was so awful at dancing that it defied the imagination. It was incredible that someone who could be so graceful in the air couldn't make a single step correctly. The wine he'd drank left him helpless against the fit of laughter that bubbled up at watching her, and Romel soon joined the outburst. They laughed all the harder when Weiss gave up and lifted her to stand on his feet. When the song was drawing to a close, Romel motioned that the two of them should go over. I'm not volunteering to injure myself, Lehrgen thought, excusing himself with a shake of his head. He'd let Romel try his hand at teaching her so he might fit in at least one dance with the woman he'd brought with him. Unlike her superior, his dance partner was extremely elegant and didn't make a single misstep. "Where did you learn, if I might ask?" he inquired after a few passes. "It was required in my family," she answered, with a nostalgic smile. "And my mother was insistent I learn ballet as well." "Ah, yes, your friend Lieutenant Weber did mention something about that," he replied. "I'm impressed you remember so well after all the years in between." "I…umm…practice by myself, when I can," she said, blushing. "You should," he replied, "you won't be in uniform the rest of your life. Or at least I hope not." He realized almost immediately that that might have come out wrong. He hadn't meant it that way. He'd meant that he hoped the war was over soon. He opened his mouth to clarify, but Serebryakov either didn't take it wrong or was graciously avoiding it, because she'd already changed the subject. "I do wonder what the lieutenant colonel will do after the war…" she said, glancing over her shoulder towards where Romel was engaged in what could only be described as a different sort of maneuver warfare than usual with Degurechaff. He didn't look to be winning. Lehrgen wondered about Degurechaff's future occasionally himself. As much as seeing her around the office for the next thirty years made him want to consider alternative careers, keeping her in the military would probably be for the best. The hierarchy she was so enamored with would curb her worst impulses so long as she wasn't promoted too far. The military was rather progressive, but there weren't any women with the title of general attached to their name, and even she might find the ingrained and unspoken rule hard to fight against. God forbid the day ever came that she decided she'd rather start wars than fight in them, and got herself into politics. "She's very capable. I'm sure she'll find something," he placated. Viktoriya sighed and then nodded. "I…I just hope she can be happy one day." "You think she isn't?" She shook her head in response. "I don't think so. I'm not so sure. I used to…the first time I met her I thought she was like a vampire, but…" Interesting. And almost pitiful, in a way. Degurechaff didn't like many people so far as he could tell. And here were the two of them, two of the very few people that she did express some favor for, both imagining her some sort of monster. "She makes a strong first impression," he said, to which Serebryakov gave a snort of laughter, and then a sad smile. "I used to think she liked it. She's so good at what she does. But sometimes I…I think she's just pretending. I catch her, sometimes, when she thinks no one sees, and she looks so…so…so forlorn. She hides it as soon as she notices I'm there, but…I don't know. I'm not sure what to make of it." "She's lucky to have an adjutant that cares so much," he said truthfully. "It's the least I can do. I wouldn't be alive if it weren't for her. And she can be nice once you get to know her. A little prickly, but I think she does care about us in her own way." He didn't reply. What was there to say except that he thought Degurechaff's very occasional instances of kindness an act to ingratiate her with others? If it comforted Serebryakov to believe it genuine, robbing her of that illusion would be unnecessarily cruel. The subject of their conversation marched over shortly, supported on Romel's arm, to pull her adjutant away, leaning on her friend for balance as they went to find food. "You should give it a try," Romel said, clapping him on the shoulder. "You're better than I am, you might get through to her." "Politely, sir, I'm going to have to decline." "It's a bit fun trying to dodge her heel coming down on your toes." "Ending up in the hospital after she trips me isn't what I'd call fun, sir," Lehrgen chuckled. "She's not so much worse than I was when I first started." "Frankly, sir, I think I'd rather have taken my chances with you." 




 

 X Gon' Give it To Ya






 
 "A little sincerity is a dangerous thing, and a great deal of it is absolutely fatal."
 
 November 26, 1927General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 The most recent debate over how to best use the troops remaining at the General Staff’s disposal having faded from shouts into murmurs the previous week meant that each commanding officer in the building had arrived for the day and shortly thereafter been delivered a sealed packet into his hands, the newest batch of orders ready to be opened and read and followed. Colonel Erich von Lehrgen settled into his chair to begin the day, placed both saucer and cup of coffee down on his desk, and took the package his adjutant had handed him a few minutes earlier from underneath an arm. Fishing the letter opener out from the top drawer of his desk, where the items contained within remained in a jumble in defiance of every attempt he made at ordering them, he made a neat slice across the top of the envelope. Once he’d discarded the cover page and was getting prepared to read the final report on the Empire’s newest strategy, he picked his coffee back up so he could drink it as he digested his latest orders. Before he could take his first sip, the cup was shakily returned to its resting place. It was all he could do not to drop it and ruin either his uniform or the rug underneath him. Maybe having an excuse to go home and change wouldn’t be so bad, Lehrgen grumbled to himself. Though, he knew if he did that, it would be all the harder to return. If he started using bad news as an excuse for a respite from the stresses of his job, soon enough he’d never leave his bed. There were slight but consequential changes to the plans as he’d last heard them. As with a good portion of the unhappy tidings he’d heard recently, his own subordinate was partially to blame, even if Lehrgen knew she couldn’t help herself. There’s such a thing as being too useful, he thought, letting his head droop forward against the heavy weight behind his eyes. He’d like nothing more than to pick up the phone and give Lieutenant General von Romel a piece of his mind. A certain lieutenant colonel might not be able to focus on anything besides the target in front of her, but Romel ought to know better. The real problem was that the troops on the front lines weren’t kept informed of the bigger picture. To keep morale high, they had to believe they could win. That gave certain generals with a penchant for pushing forward, sometimes against orders, the confidence to move swiftly and decisively. He and Degurechaff are peas in a rotten pod, Lehrgen thought darkly. Together, the two of them had managed to advance so far through Republican territory that soon it was likely the Empire would take Turus itself. The victories hadn’t come cheaply. The Imperial Army could ill afford further losses beyond what they’d already planned on. Tactically, taking Turus would be a stunning victory. Strategically, less so. It would be yet another territory to occupy and manage. And it wouldn’t defeat the Republic, simply push them back to their next stronghold. If they hadn’t given up when their capital was taken, there was no chance of them giving in over a lesser city. Unquestionably, for the offensive planned in Stalyngrad, men currently stationed on the Southern Continent would be needed on the Eastern Front. What Lehrgen’s newest update threw into question was whether the Kaiser would even allow the troop movement. His sovereign had become so enamored of the chance to have a proper colonial territory in the Mediterranean that he had decided to intervene personally, delaying the offensive against the Federation as long as possible. Lehrgen would have to remember to bow to his distractible four-year-old nephew the next time he saw him. He hadn't realized the boy was running the country. As soon as he’d gathered his wits again, Lehrgen took out his map and began the process of marking the future troop positions and strengths, the routine a comforting way of convincing himself that the Empire didn’t need as many men on the Eastern Front as he thought. Lost in minutiae that was irrelevant to someone in his position, he didn’t register that much time had passed until his phone rang, jarring him out of his thoughts. “Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff here to see you, sir,” his adjutant reported promptly. Truthfully, she was one of the last people he wanted to see. His mood was already gloomy, and in the time he’d known her, she hadn’t once done anything to improve it. But, discussing her orders with her was a part of his job, so he gave her permission to come in. “So, Lieutenant Colonel,” Lehrgen began after they’d greeted each other, unable to keep his sour attitude from leaking into his tone, “you must be pleased with your newest orders.” “No, sir,” she said stridently. “Not at all.” “The Imperial Army is practically camped outside Turus, and you don’t think we should take it?” he confirmed, the alien sensation of agreeing with her almost unpleasant, even if it did lift his spirits a touch. She glanced sideways and hesitated. “Your honest opinion, please.” She took a deep breath. “Sir, I’d like to state me strong objection for the record. Trying to take Turus on the timeline in the latest strategy is only possible if we throw away half the army on the Southern Continent in the process.” “And you don’t think that’s worth it?” “Those same men would be much more effectively used against the Federation. Once we take Turus, we won’t have a large offensive in the south again unless we march on Algére. Personally, I’d much rather have a larger army surrounding me in the east. That’s where most of the fighting will be,” she reasoned, a heartless smile stealing over her face. Of course, Lehrgen thought, wanting to roll his eyes at his own stupidity in thinking that just because they had the same opinion, they had the same reasons for it. In the east, there’s practically an endless series of battles to fight, and the more men we have, the further we can go. “They aren’t the orders I would have given either,” he sighed. “Sometimes I wonder if we aren’t so concentrated on completing the next strategic objective that we forget the general objective is to win the war. But all we can do is make the best of the plans we’ve been given." To his surprise, she backed down from her adversarial posture and her attitude transformed into something more congenial. As someone with a propensity for causing exactly the sort of problem Lehrgen was criticizing, not to mention being the person who’d proposed the whole total war theory in the first place, he’d expected Degurechaff to take issue with most of his statement. “It’s good to hear there’s someone on the General Staff who agrees with me,” she said. Agree was a slightly stronger word than Lehrgen would use in this instance. They may have reached the same conclusion, but through very different means. Still, at least she was focused on winning the war instead of some sort of vanity project, so for now, he could overlook the rest. No matter what they had to sacrifice on the Southern Continent, nothing was worth the potential disaster of undermanning the Eastern Front. The Imperial Army was all that lay between the Federation's army and Berun. When it came to the Southern Continent, there was a sizeable sea preventing the Republic from marching into the heart of the Empire. “I’m not the only one, but we have a higher authority to answer to,” he replied. “If the Kaiser wants to waste resources so inefficiently, I’d be happy to personally assist him in setting fire to a few oil depots instead,” she laughed irreverently. Their situation was so absurd that Lehrgen nearly laughed along with her. With her very words she betrayed that she had not a drop of compassion in her for her fellow man, that they were no more valuable to her than an inanimate object, yet she nonetheless wanted to save thousands of lives so she could make use of them with more efficiency. Truly, the world had become a place devoid of normal logic. Absently, he reached for the cup of coffee he'd abandoned an hour ago when he'd first read the documents he was currently agonizing over. He got the feeling that he had a long day ahead of him. Perhaps a long week or a long month. Maybe, if they were unlucky, a long year. He took a sip after lifting the porcelain to his mouth and grimaced. He should have realized it would be cold by now. "Here," Tanya said, motioning to his cup. He handed it over. She gave it back a few seconds later, steam rising from the top. In her presence, it was easy to forget that magic could be used for things besides wholesale slaughter. He fought the urge to smile at her in response to the friendly gesture, reminding himself that he was at risk of falling into the very same trap that Lieutenant Serebryakov had. Endearing herself to her superior officer was nothing but a self-serving move. There was nothing kind or altruistic about it. After she left, Lehrgen shook his head in bewilderment. He didn't think he'd ever see the day he wished other people would start looking at the world through Degurechaff's stark lens of pure, unemotional logic. If anyone should want to take Turus, it should be she and Romel, who had brought them within reach of the city. Her lack of attachment to anything besides productivity allowed her to give it up without a second thought. When I put it that way, she’s not that hard to work with, he considered, taking another sip of his pleasantly warm coffee. In fact, it made her a fair bit easier to deal with than hot-headed subordinates. Even if something was fundamentally wrong with her way of looking at things, she could at least be counted on to behave predictably once she was off the battlefield. On that level, he could have been saddled with someone far worse as a direct report. 
 January 2, 1928Near Morozovisk, Imperial Ober Ost
 Automatically, Tanya’s shoulder turned, letting the deadly spell fly harmlessly by. As soon as the momentary shock wore off, she inhaled deeply. Yelling wasn’t strictly necessary with a voice amplification spell at her disposal, but the useless idiots she’d be commanding over the next few days would never learn if she didn’t put some energy into it. “Which of you fucking half-wits almost killed me?” she shouted. She’d have to give credit to whichever member of the 203rd had passed along the warning to the other mages. Despite her diminutive stature, her new charges had taken her seriously from the start. Sheepishly, the guilty soldier raised a hand to identify himself. “Did you sleep through your lessons on directional spells?” she spat. “M-m-my deepest apologies, ma’am,” the man - or boy, really, he couldn’t have been more than a year older than she was - stuttered out, “but by the time I was in training, the course had been cut down to focus only on homing spells.” Sheesh. If the Imperial Army was hurting for mages so badly they were sending them out into battle half-trained, they might as well capitulate right now. Cutting the R&amp;D department’s budget might bump up share prices in the short term, but it was no way to run a company. Especially not one that she was working for. After watching the casualties in the other mage battalions when they’d taken Turus, Tanya had a hard time being optimistic. Now that she was back on the Eastern Front, it was time to take matters into her own hands. Even if it was exhausting, training the rest of the mages in her vicinity was an absolute necessity. They were supporting the 203rd, who was shielding her. She couldn’t have them dropping like flies. If this was what she had to work with, she’d have to adjust her approach. Putting students who needed remedial lessons in the same class as the ones who passed the exam was a waste of everyone’s time. Luckily, two of her lieutenants had learned to be elite soldiers the hard way. It shouldn’t be any trouble for them to knock some sense into the heads of the weakest links. “Everyone whose basic training was cut short, form up in that direction,” she said, pointing out where they should gather. “Lieutenants Grantz and Serebryakov will teach you how to hit enemy soldiers instead of our own. The rest of you will stay with me and Major Weiss.” A few of the men in the former group smiled tentatively in Visha’s direction as she flew over to them. How nice and innocent they all are, Tanya scoffed. “Don’t let the cute face distract you,” she reminded them. “She’s one of the strongest mages in the Empire. All of you together won’t stand a chance once she gets serious.” She caught Visha blushing at the praise as she flew off, and then turned to Weiss. “Time to see if the rest of them can at least aim correctly,” she muttered under her breath. “Are you sure you want the war to end so soon? Give it another year and you might finally get to train someone younger than you,” her second-in-command ribbed. “Two months of latrine duty not enough for you?” Weiss winced. He’d think twice next time he decided to include her in his drunken antics. If he knew the same history as she did, he wouldn’t be making light of their upcoming battle. Taking part in major offensives was something Tanya avoided when possible. While in some sense being mixed into a large group provided some advantages, such as having others to blame in the event of failure, for herself personally, the drawbacks were not worth it. She always had orders to follow, but in general, commanding her battalion or a Kampfgruppe allowed her flexibility. Crucially, it offered the flexibility to not die needlessly because other parts of the Army didn't do their job well enough. She was basically confident in her ability to subvert her orders in such a way that it preserved her life, but that was altogether more difficult when you were face to face with a general who was ordering you to die if necessary. If you couldn't explain why you’d failed to die like everyone else, you'd better hope he believes in dumb luck, or your next stop was the firing squad. She would like nothing more than to give a polite no thank you to her current assignment, which she’d received within twenty-four hours of the Imperial Army storming Turus. With not a single day’s rest in between, her Kampfgruppe had been disbanded so that her battalion could head to the Eastern Front. The location of her next battle didn't come as a surprise to her, she could read a map after all, and as far back as a year ago she'd seen the signs that the Empire might end up advancing towards the city whose name should send a shudder down the spine of anyone who had even a passing acquaintance with military history. While she could no longer remember the exact positions of German military lines in the world wars, if she'd ever known them off the top of her head, she could at least tell that the positions along the Eastern Front had resembled those of the second war more closely than the first. Aside from knowledge taken from another time and place, there was no specific reason to fear that this offensive had much chance of becoming the bloodbath she remembered reading about. Especially not for her. She would be in the air, not trapped in a city, though the air above Stalyngrad was going to be densely packed with Federation mages all the same. The chance to kill communists in large numbers was enticing, but if she had to leave some communists alive to improve her chances of staying alive, that was fine by her. There was no reason to tempt fate. Especially not when she had a vengeful spirit working against her. As soon as Tanya had received the news of her participation in the spring offensive, she wrote several pleas disguised as strongly worded warnings about leaving the northern part of the front relatively barren, but they'd either been ignored or denied. The likelihood of action the north was low, so obviously that was where she'd prefer to be. She'd done her very best to convey the message that her battalion was perfect for defending the long stretch of the northeastern front because of how quickly it could move and how disproportionately effective it was, but that had fallen on deaf ears. Several hours later, she caught a car driving into camp. Taking out her binoculars, she identified the officer who stepped out of the back seat. I suppose we can be done with training for the day, she thought, glancing at the setting sun. If her superior officer had arrived in person, it probably wasn’t a good sign. She might have been a bit overzealous if the General Staff was nervous enough that she was going to be a flight risk that they’d felt the need to send a babysitter. “Colonel,” she greeted him, touching down before offering a salute. “I’m afraid there’s no hope of sending you north,” he said glumly. “I wish I could tell you different.” She gave a sympathetic smile to the man who was just as disappointed with his task as she was. She'd heard he'd done his best to defend her idea of using the 203rd to guard the northern part of the border. Even if he hadn't succeeded, she had to be thankful of how hard he was trying to protect her and put her in a relatively tranquil part of the front. “I appreciate it all the same,” she told him. She’d have to remind her men to stay on coffee warming duty when he was around. She didn’t usually go out of her way for the sake of someone else, but drinking it at room temperature was a punishment that only communists and Being X deserved to suffer. In this case, she didn’t mind lending a helping hand to her comrades who lacked mana. xXx The officer’s mess in the current camp lived up to the standard it was supposed to meet. As fine of food as could be expected, porcelain plates, delicate silverware, and white tablecloths. With the number of high-ranking generals populating it, it came as no surprise to Colonel Erich von Lehrgen. He’d arrived just in time for dinner, and the only complaint he had about his meal was that the person sitting across from him was the very same person who had nearly given him a heart attack when she’d dropped suddenly down in front of him from the sky. Even though he’d dutifully informed her that no amount of convincing on her part was going to change her orders, she was nattering on incessantly about the mistake the General Staff was making in not listening to her. Lehrgen didn't know what was making Degurechaff so restive, but one thing he did know about her was that she had a deep personal hatred of communists. Whether it stemmed from their atheism or from the way they’d challenged Imperial hegemony he couldn’t say, but if she wanted to give up the chance to kill so many of them that her uniform was liable to be unwearable due to all the blood, something had to be wrong. That wasn’t like her at all. There was no reason to believe the northern part of the front would see any action within the next few months. As predicted, the taking of Turus had badly damaged the army on the Southern Continent, to the degree it could be almost termed Pyrrhic. There were fewer reinforcements sent north than the General Staff had hoped. Still, the Empire had enough men on the Eastern Front to cover what areas needed it. There may not have been as many men outside of Stalyngrad as they would like, but based on the casualty rates they’d seen when taking other Soviet cities, it was enough. What worried him was that Degurechaff had an intuition so keen that most of the time it wouldn't surprise him if she could read minds. The evidence was in fact very much stacked in favor of her having that ability. Maybe the Type 95 granted powers that Schugel didn't know about and she'd never deigned to reveal. The only reason he wasn't convinced she had the capacity was that if she did, Lehrgen didn't know how to explain his continued existence. He'd thought quite a number of unkind things in her presence. If she was going to such lengths to get reassigned further north, he'd decided he was going to do his utmost to support her. If that’s where she thought she’d have the best chance of a good fight, he’d trust her instincts. He’d tried his best, and there had been some sympathizers, but not enough. On top of that, he'd been ordered to the front himself. He was fairly certain that was mostly because General von Rudersdorf wanted someone he trusted to send him detailed observations and it wasn't meant as a punishment, but he wasn't completely sure of that. He didn't think he'd disagreed that stridently. So maybe he shouldn't say he'd tried his best. He'd tried, but he wasn't going to get court-martialed for her. That's not to say he didn't fear what was to come if they failed to heed her advice yet again. It was just that the only thing left for him to do would be to give her a directive under his own authority in complete opposition to the will of the General Staff. He'd pass on the chance to face a firing squad together. The only good thing that could come of dying with her was that when they arrived in Hell together and she was welcomed home with open arms, maybe she'd remember to put in a good word for him with the management. He broke himself out of that train of thought, watching her hands move as she animatedly made her case for the twelfth time. He was being dramatic. Men of his position were not summarily executed for disobedience. And Tanya had done nothing offensive enough in the last year to warrant the thought he’d just had. He should treat her more fairly. Despite her faults, she was doing her best to ensure an Imperial victory. She'd been a damn useful subordinate. Sometimes too useful for his liking, but he shouldn't criticize someone for hard work. His name was already being thrown around for promotion again on account of his management of her. Lehrgen didn't think he'd done much managing, but he wasn't going to be the one to say so. When the meal finished with her bringing over a piping hot cup of coffee along with a belated apology for dragging him all the way out to the east, he almost felt guilty. 
 January 7, 1928Between Morozovisk and Stalyngrad, Imperial Ober Ost
 It was a warm winter. Unusually warm, in a way that encouraged a heady optimism in the commanding officers used to being at a disadvantage against the Soviets during the season, their attention already focused on the nearness of victory if Stalyngrad fell. The artillery barrage was opening for a third day, and there wasn’t a single member of the Imperial Army impervious to the sense of triumph that was building in the ranks. The progress may have been slow, but it was better than the near-stalemate that had been present for the past few months. It didn't cause immediate alarm when reports about movement further north came in. If the northern army was anything like their southern peers, the Empire had the superior force. It was expected, even, that the northern army would be pushed to move ahead of schedule in an effort to distract the Empire into sending troops that way, providing relief for the men defending Stalyngrad. A few days later, when the call came in from a harried operator that the Federation Army had broken the Empire's defensive line, worry took hold of the command tent. Lehrgen wasn’t alone in thinking that though this was the first time such a thing had happened in all their years at war, it was unlikely to be the last. The Imperial Army had suffered too much attrition to be overwhelmingly powerful any longer. It wasn’t until the second call that panic began to set in. It was from a different operator and a different area, but with much graver news. Apparently, the communist cells in Polaska had decided that now was their time to strike. At this point, they had little to lose and everything to gain. If the Empire took Stalyngrad and went on to win the war, whatever movement they thought they’d started would die in an instant. They were desperate to prevent that, so even if they lacked the popular support for a real rebellion, they could hope terrorism and confusion would be enough to help the cause. The worrisome thing was that they might be right. If other dangerous groups in other disputed territories caught wind of unrest, it might turn into a constellation of internal hotspots. Once the initial flurry of calls died down, Lehrgen began to pace in front of the switchboard, growing progressively more annoyed with waving off an increasingly panicked subordinate as he tried to watch for an open phone. He needed all of thirty seconds for a personal call. Just to make sure everything was safe and sound at home. He wasn't sure what Degurechaff wanted, but there were several officers ranked higher than himself that she could speak to if she had something to contribute. They were all waiting for confirmation and orders from HQ, so there was little he could offer her besides an ear to complain into. After fifteen minutes of avoiding her successfully, she decided to ignore that he was ignoring her, and came over to stand directly in front of him. "Sir," she said, quietly, looking around to see if anyone else was listening to their conversation. He glanced around himself. All other occupants of the command tent were either engaged with actual work or were busy running back and forth between conversations. "Yes, Lieutenant Colonel?" he asked, not bothering to keep the exasperation out of his voice. At least she was short, so it was no trouble to watch for a phone over her head. "There's something I'd like to speak to you about. Privately," she said, looking around again. "Yes, alright, when I get a chance," he told her dismissively. "I'd like to speak now," she said, taking a tone that was not appropriate for addressing a superior officer. "Fine, just give me a minute," he replied. "We don't have a minute, sir," she stressed, face a mask of calm, but he could see the tension underneath. He sighed and decided to be honest with her. "I have family near some of the affected areas, just give me a moment to-" "Colonel, I understand, but our duty is to protect our fatherland, and that's what I need to speak to you about," she interrupted. "You have no family. You could never understand," he snapped back. He may have begun to regard her coolheadedness as an asset under certain circumstances, but right now her inability to be sympathetic was grating on his very last nerve. She took a deep breath and let it out slowly. He saw anger reflected back at him in her eyes. "Be that as it may," she said, tightly, "if we don’t stop the Federation in the north as soon as we can, it may doom us down here as well.” He swallowed the groan that wanted to escape, decided that his duty to the Empire was more important after all, and left with her in tow. "Please authorize my battalion to sortie immediately," she said, as soon as they were away from the central tent. "You'll need General von Mackenson's permission for that," he sighed, for what felt like the thousandth time that day. Why she'd brought him out here just to ask the impossible was beyond him. “We’re still drawing up plans for which troops will be reassigned north, and the specific mage battalion hasn’t been selected.” "I did ask," she said sullenly. "He's waiting for HQ, but they’re distracted with the developments in Polaska." Of course. Of course she'd find the field marshal and ask him directly. No one had ever described her as humble. What else had he expected? "Then I don't know what you want me to do," he replied, frustrated at everything right now, but at her especially. "Give me the order to go," she repeated. "You have the authority." "You are a part of Eastern Command right now, I do not have the-" "If you have your documents with you, you can check for yourself,” she interrupted, for the second time. “Technically, I still report directly to HQ through you. The understanding is that we fall under Mackenson's command, but on paper the 203rd is an irregular unit. With your permission, we can go now.”.” “And why is that so important?” he asked curiously. “The lines will reform further back, we have ample territory to lose if it comes down to it.” “They’ve broken through at the closest point to Kyev. If they take it, it would be a mess worse than Arene was.” “That’s a big if,” Lehrgen said skeptically. “It is,” she confirmed. “But it carries too high a risk to ignore. If we can’t supply Stalyngrad properly, we’ll lose the battle. And if that happens…” “We may not be able to win the war,” he finished. The issue wasn’t so much that losing Stalyngrad would lose them the war, but that losing it would mean an almost permanent stall to an Imperial advance. Not a loss, but a win either. A slow, grinding attrition put it to chance as to which army would be exhausted first. “Exactly,” Degurechaff sighed. “And committing aerial troops doesn’t have to be for the long-term. If we can reestablish control quickly, my battalion can be back in two or three days. If we’re missing for that time it won’t change the course of the offensive.” She followed Lehrgen back to his tent while he found his briefcase and verified what she’d said for himself. She was right. Technically. He could give her the order. That didn't mean there wouldn't be consequences, and possibly severe ones, if he did as she asked. He closed his eyes and tilted his head back to think. If he'd risked a little more a week or two ago and gotten her reassigned to the north, he wouldn't be in the position of making a much larger gamble now. She'd been right all along, just like with the evacuation at Brest. How she’d known was another question, but that was one he doubted he’d ever have an answer to. He glanced down at her, and she looked just as tired as he felt. Utterly exhausted, even. No part of her gave off the impression of wanting to undertake a long flight and then engage an enemy with only a few hours’ rest in between. For once he didn't think this had anything to do with some sort of insatiable bloodlust. There was only resignation in her voice, no excitement. He couldn't bring himself to believe that she was asking this for any reason other than that she thought it imperative. He nodded and gave her a simple "go,” waiting for her to leave before collapsing into his chair and wondering what he'd just done. xXx I can do this, Tanya told herself, instinctively reinforcing her barrier in the places where she judged that enemy fire was going to land. She'd faced worse odds before, even if the poor performance of the local battalion she’d joined up with was making the battle closer to 3:1 than the 3:2 it should have been. One of the battalions from the Federation was good enough to be called elite, but still, they weren't on par with her men. Their other battalion was nothing special. The third was that bunch from the Commonwealth that seemed to have it out for her personally. Regardless of their numerical superiority, with Tanya's help, the Imperial mages were slowly getting the better of their enemies. Her men truly were worthy of praise. All the effort she'd poured into them really would pay off in the end. She was caught off-guard when one of the Commonwealth mages broke rank and headed directly for her. Dammit, she cursed, fear pooling in her gut. She wasn't sure if she could get a spell together in time, saw the other woman's bullet, loaded with mana, coming for her, flinched as it seemed her end was approaching, and then felt herself covered in warm, sticky blood. She spared a glance downwards and saw Lieutenant Grantz falling out of the sky, but she had no time to think about that now. She heard the Federation mages shouting at their ally that Tanya was supposed to be captured, not killed. She didn't want to know what fate awaited her after that happened.. She doubted it was anything good. Being a celebrity among Named mages really was troublesome. Heedless, the enemy mage turned back to make another pass at her, and she saw that it was that one girl who refused to die. Reluctantly, Tanya drew the Type 95 out of a pocket and activated it. Now wasn't the time to play nice. 




 

 Lost in Translation






 
 "I don't want to go to heaven. None of my friends are there."
 
 
 January 11, 1928Outside Stalyngrad, Imperial Ober Ost
 Even for a major military encampment, the Imperial Army’s command tent was hyperactive. It buzzed with shouts and curses, the ring of phones and the sound of them being slammed back into place, the footsteps of men running back and forth from one conversation to the next or pacing anxiously. There were maps in the most unlikely of places. Every piece of information about the 1917 communist revolution ever produced appeared to be littering the tables. There were hurriedly calculated figures on the back pages of anything that wasn’t a vital document being pointed at with vigor, so anyone passing by could see how optimistic, or not, the person holding them was. As the initial shock wore off, Imperial officers got down to what they did best: planning. Two bad omens weren’t a death knell. Or at least they didn’t have to be. A hiccup in the plans, but not one that a little resourcefulness couldn’t fix. The only thing that would be deadly was giving in to panic and pessimism. “More coffee, sir,” Colonel Erich von Lehrgen heard from beside him. He took the cup from his adjutant gratefully and motioned for him to sit. Even if Lieutenant Ernst Sauer wouldn’t add much to the discussion, having someone there to explain things to would force his mind to operate with the clarity and thoroughness he needed from it. Aside from the Federation, the real enemy was distance. The only large concentration of men anywhere near the break in the lines was there in Stalyngrad, and they needed most of them if they wanted the offensive to go anywhere. To shore up the weakness in other parts of the front, they’d need to scrape the already thinly-staffed occupation zones to the bone. It would take a week or more to re-stabilize everything. Once that happened, distance might become more of a boon than anything else. Any other territories itching to get out from the under the Empire’s thumb were isolated from each other. It might take some finesse to prevent a wider upset, but without the ability to coordinate easily amongst themselves, there was little hope in a united uprising. The most pressing issue had already been dealt with – the 203rd would ensure the Federation didn’t enjoy aerial supremacy and hamper their ability to make a quick move towards Kyev. So long as they stopped that, the current offensive could move along as planned. It had to, or else…or else, he sighed to himself. Looking up from his map and around the tent, Lehrgen saw the same realization that had occurred to him weeks ago dawning on the faces of the other officers. Taking Stalyngrad wasn’t simply the quickest path to victory. It might be the only one. Without it, the Empire wouldn’t lose the war, but it would seriously call into question whether they could ever win. They had nothing more to give at this point. I can’t think about that right now, he reminded himself. New developments meant new plans, and as a representative from HQ, he’d have to help make them. 
 January 12, 1928Southwest of Briansk, Imperial Ober Ost
 It was a bird that woke Colonel Mikel Nikolayevich Tukhachevsky. The innocent, sweet call of a robin in springtime. It was not the alarm clock he deserved. He didn’t deserve the refreshing morning dew, nor the peaceful quiet of the dense forest. Not the rays of light filtering softly through leaves, and not the flicker of lively orange he caught when a fox darted away, startled by his movement. He closed his eyes again. He’d give death one last chance to creep up on him in his stupor, in the form of some animal or another, and take him to where he belonged. His orders had started off like any others. A limited offensive at a weak point in the lines, intended more to disrupt their enemy’s larger offensive than cause much damage by itself. He’d been glad of the assignment. It seemed to him a much safer one than facing the brunt of the Empire’s forces further south. At first, things had gone largely as predicted. A modest advance that allowed the Federation to reclaim some of the ground it had lost. Either way, it provided a distraction. The Empire would realize what they were aiming for and draw some troops away from Stalyngrad to assist, or they would be foolish enough to allow the Federation to continue making modest advances until it was too late. Mikel’s army didn’t need to hold Kyev indefinitely, only for long enough that it hampered the Imperial offensive. Then, the call had come. No doubt wanting to keep track of the Empire’s most hated mage battalion, any contact with them was to be reported to Moskva immediately. One of Mikel’s men had dutifully done so. An hour later, out of breath with excitement, Comrade Loria had phoned him. “The Devil of the Rhine’s more important than anything else,” Loria had said. “I’ll send reinforcements to you. Capture her. But don’t kill her. Whatever you do, don’t do that.” Capture her, Mikel had been told. Capture her, he’d told his men. And that was why Colonel Mikel did not deserve a pleasant morning in his life ever again. He’d forgotten, until he’d seen her, that Loria’s crimes were rumored to extend far beyond venality. The last he’d seen of the girl, she’d been in the arms of her soldiers. She might be dead by now. It would be a kinder fate than what had awaited her in Moskva. In the days of the Tsar, nobody would have ever believed Mikel if he told them the truth about his last battle. The Soviets had more equitable views on gender, so perhaps, in time, his grandchildren would listen without laughing. It was not men that had decided the battle, but women. Hardly more than girls, really. Luckily, the two monsters that had prayed for strength to some dark God had kept focused on each other, or else they’d all be casualty figures. The Legadonian girl dead and the Imperial one dying, ultimately, it was difficult to know which side had won. Neither, really. It would be up to the ground troops to battle it out without much in the way of aerial support. A third girl, a bit older than the other two, who’d been so deadly she’d almost taken out a whole company on her own, had almost been another name on the list of lives lost. But when Mikel had found her in the woods, fallen and injured, he hadn’t been able to deny the pleas she’d made in their shared language, had bound her hands and taken her orb and sent her off with two of his own injured men as prisoner. The least he could do would be to make sure she was safe. By now, Mikel could hear the sounds of his men awakening. It was his duty to live and fight another day. He stood up slowly, every muscle protesting in agony. Perhaps fighting other soldiers was more ambitious than they could manage. Something that wouldn’t fight back would be preferable. He’d seen enough carnage. And since he’d failed to do as asked, he was already a dead man, unless he could appeal to Comrade Josef himself. Giving his men a break contrary to orders wouldn’t worsen that fate. He refused to have anything to do with another of Loria’s personal requests. Some monsters were worse than others. xXx When the shouting began and he stepped outside to check on the commotion was when Colonel von Lehrgen realized that he hadn’t slept a single minute the whole night through. He hadn’t even lain down in bed to try. Holed up in the tent, he’d had only the faintest sense that time was passing. It was just after sunrise, the warm, bright morning in stark contrast to the dark faces of the men he saw. Bruised, bloodied, and slick with sweat, they were the same faces he’d sent north yesterday, excepting the fact that there were fewer of them. The most notable absence was that of their commanding officer. A horrible part of him had always imagined he’d feel relief if and when he heard the news that she’d been permanently and irrevocably retired from action. But in the end, she’d exemplified the bravery and self-sacrifice of a model soldier. Even if she’d been chasing the thrill of battle, it was hard not to feel respect for the girl who would go down as one of the Empire’s youngest casualties. The sound of Major Weiss crying, quite literally, for a doctor made Lehrgen look up, where he saw a familiar blonde ponytail. The major was cradling his commander carefully, like he was afraid to move her head. In that case, the chances were that she still lived. At least for now. The fact that the battalion was back, and in this state, told Lehrgen everything he needed to know about whether or not they’d been successful. If he had more energy, he may have joined Weiss in tears. He knew, logically, that their eventual win or loss did not hinge on the fate of a single battalion. But to see them defeated was another item on the current list of bad omens. It was hard to fight the feeling that his past few years of life had been spent in pursuit of a lost cause. “Sauer,” he said, turning to his adjutant, “would you…” “Yes, sir?” Ernst asked after a moment. Lehrgen had been intending to ask for another cup of coffee, but he’d changed his mind mid-sentence. “You didn’t see anything of importance happening in the tent when we left to come outside, did you?” “No, sir. Not really. I think most of what’s left is waiting for HQ to approve what we sent.” “Good. Your time is your own until I come find you again.” Everything always looked better after a few hours of sleep. It was high time he got some. Even in the bright light of day, it took less than a minute for him to drift off once his head hit the pillow. Lehrgen was awoken with a shake to his left shoulder, the feeling barely registering through the haze of half-consciousness. “Sir?” he heard, his adjutant’s voice making its way through the fog. His eyes blinked open, and he began to get his bearings. The hard surface beneath his cheek could only be his desk. The pain burning a stinging line along his temple meant he’d fallen asleep with his glasses on. It was light enough that the sun had been up for at least an hour. In his last memory, it had been just past four in the morning. “You said you wanted to know when Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff woke up.” He nodded and stretched, limbs aching from having slept in his chair. It had been three days, almost exactly, since her battalion had brought her back. She’d been unconscious the entire time, which Lehrgen would confess to being jealous over. Through pure luck, he’d ended up being congratulated on making his own decision to use the 203rd. If the enemy battalions had been strong enough to deal the Empire’s best soldiers so much damage, any other one wouldn’t have stood a chance. The Federation would have handily won and enjoyed continued aerial supremacy for their push for Kyev. He’d heard most of the story from Weiss. Procedurally, he needed Degurechaff’s version of events as well. And the duty fell to him to update her on the current situation. He made the short walk to the medical tent slowly. Nobody awoke from a three-day coma ready to report for duty, so he’d let a few extra minutes pass in the interim, give her time to gather her thoughts. Before he reached her bed, he knew something was off. In a sense, something was always off with her, but this was different. She was missing something. And it wasn’t the usual - empathy, emotions, morals - it was like she was missing whatever made her her. She was staring down at the rosary in her hand, quietly mumbling prayers. She'd given no acknowledgement that he was there. "Has she been like this since she woke up?" he asked the doctor. The man gave a nod. "Can you do anything about it?" The doctor shrugged like he didn't think it was anything to get worked up over. In fairness, now that her life was no longer endangered, the man must have other patients that needed him more urgently. "She's probably just in shock. Should come out of it eventually," he said, leaving to see to the other residents of the hospital. The last thing Lehrgen needed was for Degurechaff to be even crazier than she used to be. He'd thought her insane before, but that was a more controlled sort of insanity than whatever this was. He wanted to give her the news and get this ordeal over with. “Lieutenant Colonel,” he said, tapping her shoulder lightly. He didn’t want to shake her and risk reopening wounds. “Degurechaff,” he sighed, when she didn’t give any indication she’d heard him. “Hey,” he tried, snapping in front of her face. Still nothing. “Tanya," he said finally, pushing gently at her forehead to tilt it up and try to make her look him in the eye. “You in there?” His arm was suddenly gripped with a bruising force, but her eyes flicked up to his and he could see she was back to full awareness. For a second she looked desperately afraid, and he wasn't sure what he should make of it. He'd never seen her scared before, and this was closer to full-blown panic. Before he could ask, it had morphed into a manic sort of rage, her small form radiating killing intent. "What was I just doing?" she croaked, voice scratchy. "I think you were praying," he said, and her hands came off his arm to grasp her rosary. It almost looked like she was fighting with herself, but after a few seconds she tugged if off, scattering some of the beads, and threw it as far as she could. Maybe he'd talk to her another time. She looked like she wanted to commit a very bloody murder right now. If she’d lost the control she normally kept over that side of her, there was no telling who might become a victim. Plus, if her head was so addled that her short-term memory wasn't working properly, it would do no good to tell her anything. He made to leave but she cleared her throat. "Apologies, sir.” He turned around but kept a healthy distance between them, then shook his head at what she’d said. “It’s a lot to take in,” he commented. “That wasn’t the worst reaction I’ve seen by far.” “What happened?" “What’s the last thing you remember?” “Lieutenant Grantz was…” “Killed in the line of duty,” he confirmed, raising an eyebrow. If that was her last memory, she had almost no recollection of the battle. Her eyes had lowered upon hearing the news. Lehrgen had heard the man had saved her. It seemed even she could feel something about that. "Lieutenant Serebryakov was captured, but is alive, as far as we know." "Dammit," she said lowly, clenching a fist. "There was a mage from the Commonwealth’s battalion who was, by all accounts from your men, impossible to kill," he continued. "Was?" "You did it," he told her, "but not easily." “And the march on Kyev?” “Slow. Too slow to do much damage, thanks to your efforts. I expect the doctor will tell us soon how long your recovery will take, but I doubt you’ll be called to fight again for another month or two.” “I’ll be missing out on some of the bloodbath, then?” “Yes, though I wouldn’t call it that just yet,” Lehrgen replied. She looked down, biting her lip like she was trying to control her expression into something other than disappointment. He gave her a minute to process things before he continued. If she couldn't recall most of the details of her last battle then there was no way her mind could be working at its usual capacity. And besides, this was little more than a personal aside. He knew he owed her an apology. What he'd said to her had been mean-spirited. He'd been stressed, had let it get the better of him, but it wasn't an excuse to snap at her so rudely, even if there was truth to what he'd said. It wasn't her fault she didn't have a family. They'd abandoned her, not the other way around. He should never have let personal matters occupy him in the first place. He was far from the only one who'd been distracted, but he liked to think he held himself to higher standards than most. "Degurechaff, I-," "Colonel," he was interrupted, his adjutant ducking his head in. "Headquarters for you." He bade her goodbye with a salute, which she returned, for the first time in his memory, imperfectly. Ernst kept glancing over at him as they walked to the busiest part of camp, the part where the communications equipment was centralized. That wasn’t a good sign. It meant he knew something, and that the something was expected to garner a reaction out of Lehrgen once he was updated. “Have you heard the news?” General von Rudersdorf asked, once he’d picked up the phone. “Nothing since last night.” “You sitting down?” “Yes,” he replied, swallowing against a lump of anxiety in his throat. “We successfully sank a Commonwealth ocean liner carrying a good deal of ammunition yesterday evening.” Lehrgen fought against an inopportune laugh, wondering if his boss had asked him to sit down because of how shocking it was to hear that a submarine had actually managed to hit something. The Empire had the finest submarines in the world when it came to their maximum depth, their sturdy construction, their maneuverability. And yet somehow, their most critical component – their torpedoes – were so unreliable that the boats were little more than fancy diving compartments. “It was largely a passenger ship,” Rudersdorf continued, with a sigh. “It was flying the Commonwealth flag and carrying war materials, it was a legitimate target, but there were close to two thousand civilians.” Lehrgen almost wished he hadn’t been sitting down. At least then there’d be a chair he could drop into. It would be a more satisfying response to the thought that their island neighbor was going to finally commit themselves to the war in more than a support capacity than rubbing at his forehead. “The Commonwealth can’t field a large army,” he said, taking a reassuring breath. “At least not quickly. If we can take Stalyngrad we can put a halt to any further offensives in the east. The Federation will run out of steam on its own without a good industrial base. We could pivot the rest of the men westward again if the Commonwealth comes across the channel.” “That’s what the politicians are hoping we’ll be capable of,” Rudersdorf replied. “But it might not be the Commonwealth we’re facing.” “Sir?” “Oh, the whole population of Albion is up in arms about it of course, but it’s caused some considerable infighting. Enough to delay any sort of resolution. The opposition party already came out with an editorial on how the party in power got their country involved in a war that has nothing to do with them. It’s the Americans that will cause more trouble. Only about two hundred of them on the ship, but to the general public it was an act of war.” Lehrgen’s shoulders slumped downwards so he could rest his elbows on the table in front of him. The Americans might not be famed as one of the world’s more professional armies, but they could call upon a substantial amount of money and manpower. So far, the politicians arguing in favor of joining the war to protect their financial interests had been held at bay by those that argued against giving any assistance to a communist regime. But if public opinion had swayed sharply in one direction, there would be a declaration of war within the week. “Sir, please tell me our government is getting ready to start peace talks.” “No,” Rudersdorf sighed. “It’s too late now. The other side is too sure they’ll win. At this point, our best option is to fight. If we win Stalyngrad and send those men west, we can give the other armies more than just a bloody nose. It might convince them that pressing forward will cost too much, and they’ll give us a better deal than unconditional surrender. As long as the politicians in the States and the Commonwealth can go back claiming they won, that may be enough for them.” Lehrgen made a noncommittal noise of displeasure to that. A week ago. Just a week ago, if they’d initiated peace talks, the Empire might have come out of this fight largely unscathed. With little to show for the years of economic hardship and millions of deaths, perhaps, but no worse off than any of the other countries involved. “Well, onto happier subjects, I hear congratulations are in order,” Rudersdorf chuckled. “If you hadn’t sent the 203rd on your own discretion, the enemy mages might have overwhelmed a lesser battalion and cut a path to Kyev for their army.” “I’m not sure that matters much anymore, sir.” “Better than the alternative.” I think I’ll be hearing more of that phrase than I want to over the next few months, Lehrgen sighed, hanging up the phone. Barring some sort of miracle, a good alternative outcome was no longer in the cards. All they could do was try to minimize how much they’d lose. xXx For Tanya von Degurechaff, the worst part of being confined to a hospital cot was that she had no way to vent her frustration. There were too many injuries to make rolling over, standing up and pacing, or even banging her fists a good idea. She couldn’t even scratch at the burning, itching sensation that arose from wounds healing unnaturally quickly. It was no fun playing in a rigged game. She couldn't prove it, but anyone who could withstand the firepower of the Type 95 long enough to retaliate in force had to have supernatural assistance. If the numerous bandages and full-body ache were anything to go by, she'd been dealt her fair share of blows before she’d killed her opponent. It was likely only due to the other girl’s inexperience that Tanya had been the one to survive the encounter. It annoyed her a bit that she’d become so used to thinking of herself as Tanya that hearing the name had snapped her out of it, but being Tanya was better than the alternative, which was some form of mental enslavement to her mortal enemy. Obviously, he’d meant to push her over the edge with this latest stunt of his. What sort of weird complex did Being X have if he kept giving teenaged girls deadly weapons? She was starting to think there might have been more truth to the supernatural parts of the Joan of Arc legend than she’d originally thought. Shouldn’t something claiming to be God have better things to do? She took a breath and ran her hands through her hair, some of it still matted with blood. She took a moment to give a thank you to Grantz. Other humans were infinitely more reliable saviors than supernatural entities. She'd always been prepared to use her subordinates as human shields when it came down to it. Still, it didn't feel good to see a promising subordinate’s life snuffed out. Well, if one of us had to die, it definitely shouldn't have been me, but if I was allowed to live my life free of interference, no one would have needed to die, she thought, looking around the nearby beds to see if she recognized any faces. Hopefully prisoners of war would be exchanged efficiently and as soon as possible. Serebryakov should be relatively safe. The only issue was that her family had fled the Communists, so they might take particularly unkindly to her fighting under the enemy flag. But she was a charming woman, so even communists probably weren't evil enough to hurt her. If necessary, she could always play the card of begging for understanding, since she'd been forcefully conscripted. Tanya's thoughts returned to her own predicament. If the Imperial Army’s strength was beginning to falter, her most immediate problem was whether it was safe to use the Type 95 at all for the next few months. Without it, she might end up as a casualty statistic regardless of the war’s outcome, but with it, she might survive in name only. If she’d known she was going to be facing such danger flying north, she wouldn’t have gone in the first place. Although, maybe it was for the best, she thought. That enemy mage would have found her again eventually. It was best to nip problems like that in the bud. Plus, this way she wouldn’t have to worry about being called up again for a few weeks. If she’d faced the same battle after weeks of fighting above Stalyngrad, exhaustion might have been the death of her. Anyway, assuming she survived the end of the war with her mind intact, she’d have no time to spend worrying about other people. Her only concern could be over the future of her employment situation should the war end in a loss. If her original history lessons were any guide, she could be expecting food shortages, runaway inflation, and widespread joblessness. Under those types of conditions, no one could be expected to want to hire a scrawny fourteen-year-old. The advantage of being a scrawny fourteen-year-old was that she would still eligible to return to the orphanage for a few years. It would give her a bed to sleep in and enough food to subsist on while she planned her next move. With nothing more productive to think about, Tanya's mind turned to letting loose every curse she knew in every language she knew at Being X, eventually settling into what she still considered her native tongue. She'd be damned if she let herself get out of practice and gave that devil cause to think she'd given up. xXx There wasn’t a single soldier in the entire camp who looked well-rested. The dark circles ranged from mild to severe, but no one was without them. Before the supply of sleeping pills ran out, stocking up on them would be smart. Lehrgen didn’t like having to rely on them, but until some organization and routine returned to his life, they were a necessary evil. The sun had been below the horizon for a few hours by the time he had a free moment to stand up, stretch, and go in search of the field hospital’s stock of pharmaceuticals. He was given a week’s supply. Either the inventory was lower than he’d thought, or the doctor was an optimistic man. He’d bet on the former. And while he was there, he might as well visit his subordinate again, clear his conscience with a sincere apology for his unprofessional behavior, and then tell her the news that Rudersdorf had relayed to him. By the time Lehrgen was close enough to make out that Degurechaff was asleep, he could hear her mumbling something to herself. Waking her up might have been the kinder thing to do, but he didn't want to know what gave the girl who'd occasionally haunted his bad dreams nightmares of her own, so he turned around to leave, but stopped when his mind registered that what she was saying sounded less like mumbles and more like distinct words. Just not in any language he'd ever heard. He froze for a second, terror that he knew to be irrational sending ice coursing through his veins. She's been called the Devil of the Rhine. I've called her a monster myself. She's been called a demon repeatedly, sometimes as praise. But is she actually possessed? Is she speaking in tongues? Was the rosary she ripped off more than a decoration? Do I need to call someone to perform an exorcism? he wondered, theories that grew stranger by the second popping into his head. He shook himself. It was surely just gibberish. Well-pronounced gibberish, but meaningless all the same. Still, he carefully backed out of the room, half-afraid that her eyes would fly open and it would be something other than her that stared out through them. Luckily, she could only haunt him for so much longer. The next day, he was summoned back to Berun, presumably so that he could give advice on how to lose a war as gracefully as possible. 




 

 Just blow your nose and dry your tears; We'll all be back in a few short years






 
 "No man is rich enough to buy back his past."
 
 
 June 6, 1928Outside Parisee, Imperial Francia
 With something approaching a spring in his step, Colonel Erich von Lehrgen barely avoided hopping down from the train onto the platform and twirling his briefcase like some sort of oversized child. It wouldn’t do to have anyone think he was happy with the way things were going. Objectively, there was nothing to be happy over, and wouldn’t be for months, perhaps years. Stalyngrad had turned into exactly the bloodbath that Degurechaff had predicted. There’d been no way to send enough men west to give the Americans the greeting they deserved. The Imperial Army’s only saving grace over the past few months had been that their newest enemy was inexperienced when it came to modern warfare. The Empire had invented it. The peace talks that should have been held a year ago were finally here, courtesy of the Imperial Army’s last battle, which had convinced their enemies that further bloodletting was in no one’s best interest, that the march to Berun would be littered with too many bodies to make it worth forcing a total surrender. No matter what might come of the talks – no matter how unfair, how punitive, how unnecessarily harsh to a country that had done nothing but defend itself – he could complain about that later. For today, it was hard not to feel optimistic that at least it was all over. Even if the starting point was bad, it would be a point from which to work, a guaranteed end to that special sort of misery borne from uncertainty. Of course, there would be no way to escape some territorial losses, the way they might have had they made peace this time last year. But the concessions the Empire’s delegation was proposing, of pieces carved out from already-disputed locales and a partial disarmament to bring the Imperial Army’s size more in line with those of their neighbors, wouldn’t spell the end of Imperial power. It should just be enough to reassure the other countries that the Empire wouldn’t dominate the continent by default. As he made his way from the small train station near the eerily quiet front and through a half-demolished village, Lehrgen spotted a bar still in operation. Though it conspicuously lacked a roof and a section of its southeastern wall, the sturdy stone structure largely stood as it likely had for the past two hundred or years or more. Happy, sad, or bored, soldiers would always want to drink, so it wasn’t unusual to find an impromptu beer hall anywhere with a garrison, no matter the level of destruction. He let his feet take him towards the daytime carousing. The men smartened up once he got close enough that they could determine his rank, then relaxed again at his gesture. An officer of his rank wasn’t supposed to huddle with enlisted men over drinks, but today wasn’t a day for strict observance of protocol. All Lehrgen was looking for was an excuse to delay completing the assignment he’d been sent there for. A slowly-savored beer to extend the good mood he was enjoying for the first time in too many months before he had to speak with someone who would never find anything positive to say about the end of a war. It wasn’t that he didn’t consider himself a patriotic man. In a certain way, he’d say he was more so than Degurechaff even. What he wanted was what was best for the Empire, and that meant a stable, politically powerful country well-defended by their army. It didn’t mean they needed to extend their borders to the ends of the Earth no matter the cost. He was handed a beer which would’ve been bad even were it not warm, but he didn’t mind particularly. It would make it easy not to drink too fast. Taking the glass away from the counter, Lehrgen settled into a stool at his own table, idly observing the street outside through the mortar wound in the wall. “Sir?” he heard from behind him a few minutes later. He turned his head slightly to indicate he was listening. “What are we going to do now?” I’m not your father, he wanted to say, but when he spun around to look at the group of faces waiting expectantly for an answer, none a day over seventeen, an unpleasant thought occurred to him: in a different world, he might have been. The years of war had dragged on interminably as they’d gone by, but in a certain way, it felt like time had paused, only to be resumed now. He’d read no books for pleasure, taken up no new hobbies, gone on no holidays, begun no relationships – friendly or otherwise – only to have them end because he worked too much, successive birthdays had been barely acknowledged. It made his memories into a dense jumble not easily parsed into distinct weeks or months or years, so the fact that he was no longer of an age with the older brothers of new recruits had largely escaped him. “Learn a trade,” Lehrgen said, groping for an answer. His friends who knew a thing or two about banking had confided that even winning the war wouldn’t make the adjustment back to a normal economy easy, but these boys couldn’t do much with advice like buy real assets. “People always need food,” one of the soldiers shrugged. “Farms and grocers should be safe enough.” Lehrgen shook his head. “People without money can’t spend it,” he replied. “Even on necessities. Better off making yourself useful to people who won’t fall on hard times. The market for luxury goods is smaller, but it’s always there.” “I don’t s’pose it’s something you have to worry about,” one of the others commented. Lehrgen shook his head again and then stood, tossing enough money onto the table to cover a second round for anyone who needed their nerves soothed. “Good luck with it,” he said as he departed, in search of someone whose own irresponsible parents had left their bundle of terror for the rest of them to deal with. It was a different hospital and a different front, but he’d be making a bedside visit to Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff again. This time in the full light of day, so she wouldn’t give him any more scares. To his relief, she was napping when he approached. He’d been sent to take her Type 95 away for safekeeping before anyone unfriendly learned there was a quad-core orb floating around. It was cowardly to swipe it from her bedside table while she slept, but it would look even worse if he got into a game of tug-of-war with her. Especially because he’d lose it. He picked up the orb and pocketed it, then backed up a few paces from her bed and cleared his throat. “Sir?” she asked sleepily. “We may need to account for all our armaments soon, you understand,” he began, once she’d sat up. She nodded. “It would be a disaster if another nation got their hands on quad-core technology and copied it.” She nodded again, this time with patriotic vigor, then winced like she’d moved her head too much. “If anyone ever asks, you lost the Type 95 during the battle near Kyev.” Her eyes went to her table. He fished the orb out of his pocket and showed it to her. “I had the doctor pick it up for me earlier,” he lied. “You’re taking it away from me?” she gasped. This reaction had been exactly what he was afraid of. That her strict obedience to orders would come in conflict with a desire to cause harm, and she’d refuse to relinquish the device. Her gaze had fixed itself on the orb, staring at it with unnatural focus. “It will be going into a vault,” he affirmed. “Just like that?” she breathed, like she couldn’t believe her ears. “Just like that, it’ll be gone?” Her breaths started coming shallow, like she was so angered by the thought she was having trouble controlling it. Wordlessly, Lehrgen gave her a single nod of confirmation, then left before she could make any rash decisions. He wanted to return to the capital with it as soon as possible, before the chaos calmed down and orderly searches for travelers with illicit goods began. Or, more exactly, he wanted to send the item that gave Degurechaff so much power to the other side of the world. Better yet, the bottom of the ocean. But he’d be relieved of his job if he did anything of the sort, so for now, he’d be satisfied with a heavily-padlocked container. 
 June 30, 1928City Palace, Imperial Capital Berun
 Tanya von Degurechaff - soon to be just Tanya Degurechaff again, a result of an overzealous enemy striking of any titles the Army had bestowed during the war - had never seen the need for an extravagant home. A steady income that paid for a well-appointed apartment was all she’d ever asked for. Regardless, it had taken most of her focus not to turn her head and crane her neck to get a better view of the corridor she’d walked through a few minutes ago, the only part of the former royal palace she’d get to see besides the vast reception hall she stood in now. Shoulder-to-shoulder with her fellow officers, though in the interest of accuracy, it might be more precise to say shoulder-to-waist, she patiently waited for the conclusion of the somber ceremony for which they were gathered. A state funeral honoring the war dead wasn’t high on her list of places to be, but at least she wasn’t among the honorees. Like this well-fed clergyman knows anything about real sacrifice, Tanya scoffed to herself, listening to the pastor droning on about the subject. For his job, he’d been required to sacrifice the rational part of his brain, but that could be his only familiarity with the topic. She looked down so no one saw her roll her eyes, then tugged self-consciously at a too-short sleeve. A growth spurt had decided to sneak up on her at the worst moment possible. Financial security not guaranteed and she wouldn’t be receiving another uniform. Hopefully ever. She looked back up and let her eyes wander around to the other attendees in her row. For an Imperial officer, keeping a stony face was the norm. Crying at a funeral wasn’t remarkable in and of itself, but she hadn’t expected to see such open displays of grief. After so many years of bad news, these weren’t men who teared up for no reason. Is it going to be a problem if I don't cry? she wondered with exasperation. It might seem like she wasn't appropriately upset at the loss of life. It would be strange for a fourteen-year-old girl not to cry at something that had many older gentlemen in tears. She wouldn’t want anyone to think she hadn’t tried her best in her final battles because she didn’t care enough. At a time like this, everyone was looking for someone to blame. Becoming a pariah just to preserve a little dignity wasn’t a smart trade to make. The real issue was how to make herself cry. The art of fake tears wasn’t one she was familiar with. A high-performing employee had no need to make emotional appeals for mercy when review season came around. And if she couldn’t fake them, they’d have to be real. This was one place her new body was at a natural advantage. Under certain circumstances, letting her physical age get the better of her could be a useful tool. Thinking about it, she had plenty of reasons to be upset. Her livelihood had been ripped away. Her future was uncertain. To top it all off, some of the people she’d poured countless hours into were gone. What a waste. And an absolute tragedy. There they are, she thought with satisfaction, when she felt the sting in her eyes. If she could just let a few slip out, this charade could end. Once everyone saw that she wept over the fallen, there would be no inconvenient questions. …I'll admit that it feels a bit cathartic, Tanya sighed, trying to tug her sleeve down again. Crying was biologically designed to alleviate stress, after all. Before she wiped her face, she should make sure people saw the tears. It would be terrible to have embarrassed herself for no reason. She turned her head slightly, letting people see the wet trails glistening on her face. Everyone who made eye contact tried to give her comforting smiles back, except for Colonel von Lehrgen. He looked at her with such shock it was as though he'd witnessed her eating a formal dinner with nothing but her hands. How uncomfortable. Even if he was kind at heart, he had a stiff exterior. The fact that she was incapable of maintaining the same might have taken her down a notch. It was possible he was wondering what happened to his reliable junior officer now that he’d seen her tearful face. Most of the people there with her had probably lost more than brothers-in-arms. They might have lost childhood friends or family members. She’d failed to consider that it could come off as a little pathetic that she’d cry over losing a few subordinates. Of course, she had experienced a major loss before. But that was almost fifteen years ago now, and anyway, she never saw the point in crying over it. It wasn’t as though Being X was going to send her back if she started fussing. She’d admit she felt bad about it occasionally. Her parents had both been living, so they would have had to deal with anything she’d left behind. She didn’t think she’d had many loose ends, so hopefully they hadn’t been too inconvenienced by her unexpected departure. As for that degenerate who’d murdered her, she expected he was feeling some regrets after being sentenced to life in prison. If she’d known he was so lazy that he couldn't even be bothered to commit homicide somewhere that wasn't under 24-hour surveillance, she’d have fired him much sooner. Finished with her reflective mood, Tanya wiped her face off and returned her attention to the service. She would have rather done it more privately, but she owed Grantz a final goodbye. 
 July 11, 1928Detskoe Selo, Outside Lenangrad, Rus Federation
 Our tea is better, John Kanes sniffed to himself with a petty harrumph, putting the cup back down after a taste. And so are our palaces. With Parisee still in too much turmoil to host an international delegation, the Federation had insisted. And so here he must be, in this godforsaken city filled with more mosquitoes than there were people in the world. His aunt had called to ask if he’d caught the pox after seeing his photo in the papers. Besides being uncompromising on location, the Federation also vociferously insisted that if anyone was responsible for winning the war, it was them. They’d committed their land, their people, and their economy fully, unlike the Commonwealth or the States, and had actually managed to win battles against the Imperial Army, unlike the Republic or the trio of lesser powers in attendance. They wanted all the credit just for doing their part. You people are all impossible, Kanes wanted to shout to the men sitting around the table with him. He’d never asked to represent the Commonwealth. He’d been chosen by virtue of handing in the only halfway reasonable economic proposal for Europa’s future. If this is what he got for honest, hard work, he’d have to start putting in no more than fifteen hours a week so such a thing could never happen to him again. “We must have reparations!” his Republican counterpart shouted for the thirty-seventh time. Kanes had been keeping count. “You might have considered that before invading a larger power without gathering a coalition,” the American delegate sneered. “Our people demand justice!” “Then perhaps another revolution is in order,” Kanes sighed, breaking his silence. “You do love them so. Keep the museums guarded or the guillotines might be broken out again to deal with poor leadership.” An uneasy alliance had formed between most of the nations that shared a border with the Empire, intent on dismantling it back into principalities, impoverishing all of them, and leaving them completely incapable of defending themselves. Dacia was the only one who ever sided with the more reasonable position. They were now more worried about an overpowered neighbor to their east than one to their west. To his credit, the Federation’s own ambassador appeared to be completely aware that a heavy-handed approach to the Empire’s fate would disturb any balance of power that might result from Europa’s first comprehensive treaty in a hundred years, and turn hateful eyes towards the monstrously large communist nation. And yet, the poor man was hamstrung by his own leader, who wouldn’t suffer a relatively intact Imperial state to his west for reasons nobody could give a good explanation for. Kanes couldn’t exactly blame Mr. Malyukov for throwing logic out the window in favor of obedience. Word was that good old Secretary Josef had executed the very man responsible for leading the Federation’s Army into some semblance of professionalism, success making him too popular of a figure for the dictator to tolerate. “The Empire is a massive economy. If we force it into collapse it could very well take the rest of us down with it,” Kanes explained for the seventh time, with a patience he didn’t really feel, as he pulled a piece of paper from his folio. “I’ve presented you with a fair assessment of their ability to pay.” This argument could have ended long ago if the Americans had committed formally to an Anglo coalition. But they were still set on being touchy about the mages who’d been killed. They’d leant their Legadonian refugees as a support force and the Commonwealth had used them as first-line soldiers. I understand the anger, Kanes sighed to himself, rubbing his temples, but is it really worth fouling up the negotiations over? Well, there was always the possibility it was his own fault. Maybe the American diplomats were still angry because Kanes had laughed when they’d brought up some idea they’d called the League of Nations. He’d tried to mollify them by saying it was excellent in theory, as a goal five or ten years from now, but feelings may have already been hurt. Really, though, did the Americans not understand the situation? Everyone disliked the Entente for having pulled some stupid political stunt that had brought them all here. The time for calling up a “League of Nations” would have been once it became clear that the Empire would win handily against their northern neighbor. Instead, the Republic had repeated the mistake of getting themselves in over their heads, forcing all the rest of them to scramble for a response. The Dacians blamed the Republic for leading them into a war they were in no way prepared for. The Republic was still angry that neither the Americans nor the Commonwealth had come to their aid before their country was occupied. On principle, nobody wanted to ally more closely with the Federation than necessary. Even the Ildoans had managed to join the community of mutual dislike after they’d promised their services to first one side then the other, only joining the war when it was too late to be of use to anyone in hopes of getting some territory. Tell me, how do you expect us to form a league out of people who are only here because for the moment they dislike the Empire slightly more than they dislike each other? Kanes wondered, glancing up at Mr. Kellog, the lead negotiator for the States. The root of the problem was that the Americans weren’t invested enough in Europa’s affairs to care about maintaining a delicate balance. They wanted peace among their trading partners, their loans repaid, and a few punishments imposed on the Empire so the political class could tout the victory come next election. In essence, the Commonwealth wanted the same, aside from the fact that a balanced Europa was more imperative for the island nation. They’d joined the war to prevent the Empire from dominating the continent. They couldn’t agree to a peace that would do nothing aside from give the Republic or the Federation the chance to do the same. Though, neither of them is in any position to do so either, Kanes reasoned, reconsidering where he might have some room to move towards the demands of the other powers. The Republic would need years to recover and the Federation had turned right around and resumed the same ill-considered farm collectivization effort they’d been pursuing before jumping into the war. They were little threat to anyone for now. Better to come to a provisional agreement sooner, Kanes decided. Uncertainty was never good for an economy, and none of the continental powers had good ones at the moment. The Commonwealth needed more trading partners than just the Americans. Once heads had cooled in a year or two they could revisit some of the more unnecessary items. Enlarging Legadonia and Dacia would shift power around more equitably. And a buffer state between the Empire and the Federation wasn’t a bad idea if they didn’t want the communists preying on a weakened neighbor. After allowing some time for the Empire to move its factories, a western buffer could be made from the Lowlands, and one that would be a good trading partner for the Commonwealth. An economic disaster made by reparations would take years to haul themselves out from, but a too-strict disarmament could be turned around as soon as relations improved and it became clear how unstable it made the continent. Break the Empire in half instead of in pieces and I think everyone will sign on, Kanes thought, nodding to himself. With that, he clapped his hands audibly to get attention. “Gentlemen,” he said, lighting a cigar. “We’ve made the same arguments back and forth for a month. It’s time to work something out.” 
 September 7, 1928Schlesischer Bahnhof, Imperial Capital Berun
 The summer of 1928 was the warmest one yet on record for the century. Even twenty minutes before sunrise, the air wasn’t the least bit cool. Not even a light jacket was necessary, especially not over the layers of a uniform. Erich von Lehrgen, who wasn’t sure whether he was a colonel anymore despite the rank insignia he wore, checked his watch ten minutes past the hour. He’d heard the train schedules had become more erratic, but if even the day’s first train was late, the breakdown in order was more serious than he’d realized. Another ten minutes passed as passengers grouped on the platform, staring curiously down the tracks every few seconds. The delay in pulling away from the station was a perfect prelude to a journey that was no longer an uninterrupted ride. The train stopped at the new border in Kreuze three hours in. Technically, he was entering the independent nation of Polaska, but because the communist rebels had technically occupied the government buildings of Warsau when the war ended, the Federation had managed to make sure the new country was run by the party, and they took their orders from Moskva. Lehrgen thought he answered a hundred questions between the two men tasked with inspecting the train. He finally gave up and handed over a hefty bribe, which caused an immediate change in attitude. Five hours later, the train crossed the border back into Imperial territory. The area immediately surrounding Konigsberg had been a bastion of royal support and hadn't turned over to the communists when the opportunity presented itself to join a new nation. Thank God for small mercies. Even still, the city was beautiful. Not a single mortar had touched it throughout the duration of the war. There was a gloomy pall at odds with the spring weather, but if one avoided eye contact with the residents one could pretend the Empire was still in one piece. Lehrgen made himself stop the demoralizing thoughts. He shouldn't let personal tragedy cast too large a shadow over everything. The terms of the armistice had been harsher than anyone expected, but he knew it could have been worse for the Empire. Or, the North Germanian Empire, if he wanted to be technical. The Ostrian Empire had been legislated back into existence, taking the Slovaks, Slovenes, and Croats along with them. All conquered territory was ordered relinquished back, but that was hardly an imposition. Trying to administer it would have been a nightmare. Imperial Norden and Dacia were to be ceded back to the Entente and Grand Duchy respectively. Those were harder losses to stomach, but they had never been integrated fully into the core territory, so the separation wasn't terribly painful. Losing Polaska had been the most difficult, especially for his peers, but better to have Polaska carved out to their east than the industrial lands in the west. Their modest colonial holdings below the Sahara Desert had been turned over to the Commonwealth in recognition of their assistance to the Federation. Combined with the other nation's established colonies the territory might be valuable, but for the Empire they had been little more than trophies. In the main, they'd often been a losing investment. The other countries had taken great pleasure in dismantling the Imperial nobility and the Army, but only modest reparations payments had been demanded, and those only for certain cases of egregious destruction. The numbers weren’t unreasonable. Or at least they wouldn’t be once the Imperial economy righted itself, and who knew how long that would take. Almost hilariously, the Federation looked, to the outside observer, to be punishing itself for helping to win the war. Apparently there had been some disagreement between the Secretary General and one of the government ministers. The Secretary, known for his boundless paranoia, had executed not only the minister in question but a number of the officers who he felt were more loyal to the other man. At this point, the Imperial military might be in less disarray than the Soviet one. So really, Lehrgen reminded himself, he was not in a position to complain. His parents hadn't been all so young anyhow. Both of them had been in good health, but he had plenty of friends whose own had already passed of natural causes. They’d been visiting friends in another city when the Polaskan communists had begun a riot. He’d warned them to keep close to home, but his father never had believed that there were people in their country who, deep down, didn’t want to be part of their Empire. It had made him careless. When he arrived to the old estate for what would be the last time, he didn't mind when his niece and nephew jumped on him or when the newest addition to the family gave an ear-splitting wail right next to his head. The children were especially excitable because they were moving, and to the Unified States of all places. They wanted to tell him all about the boats they were going to ride and the place they were going to live and the cities they were going to see. Lehrgen's sister-in-law had some cousins who had immigrated years past. That and money had eased the process of immigrating significantly when his brother had decided he saw a brighter future in the States than in the Empire. Erich privately agreed, but his duties bound him to Berun, at least for now. By rights, the inheritance should largely have passed to the elder of the two von Lehrgen brothers, but the progressive provisional government which had taken power in the final days of the war had abolished the entailments laws that had stipulated that rule. Otto had generously agreed to split the value of the estate in half. Not that theirs was anything special. It wasn't one of the vast holdings that were common a bit further to the west, like in Pommerin where his somewhat distant cousins lived on the larger and wealthier plot of land that belonged to the older branch of the family. Theirs was just a later acquisition by some reactionary great-grandfather who'd liked the idea of owning land in old Preussland, and who was likely now turning in his grave over its sale. Personally, Lehrgen couldn't have cared less. He had no desire to take up managing the property, and in any case most of the eastern estates were somewhat indebted, some of them quite deeply. The only reason theirs hadn't been was that his father had done everyone the favor of marrying the non-noble but wealthy daughter of an industrialist from Dortemund, but that money wouldn't last forever if it was continuously sunk into unproductive agricultural ventures. As far as he was concerned, his ancestor's decision to buy the land was good more for the fact that it happened to abut the Dohnoff estate than for financial reasons. The Grafin Marian wasn't so much older than him, and being able to count a true aristocrat among his close friends was a privilege he did his best not to abuse. The sale itself had gone very well. The dispossessed landowners who still had healthy finances were clamoring for another piece of property, so had bid up the price exorbitantly above what the fair value ought to have been. That nearly compensated for the fact that he had to buy out the other half of their home in Lichterfeld so he could continue living in it. Now, all that was left was to give a final sendoff to his childhood home and Otto’s family. After a last walk through the empty house, it was time to see them off and onto their ship. "Come visit," Otto said, with a firm handshake. "Eventually," Lehrgen promised. There were likely many years ahead of him before he would have the leisure to take a tour of the States. "Dear," his sister-in-law cut in, throwing off her usual proper demeanor for a hug, "sometimes I do think you barely know your own brother." She pulled back to look at him. "Write," she said, commandingly. "And often." "That I can guarantee," he said with a smile. Lehrgen waved them off, watched the ship depart, then took the next train back to what was now, officially, his home.     




 

 Praying for the end of time so I can end my time with you






 
 "In this world there are only two tragedies. One is not getting what one wants, and the other is getting it."
 
 October 28, 1929St. Mary’s Children’s Home, Karew, Imperial Capital Berun
 On Sundays, she had to wake up early. Waking up early wasn’t the issue. Most mornings, the soft rustle of her roommate getting out of bed roused her anyway. The problem lay more in opening her eyes and getting up early. Living for free meant Tanya couldn’t exercise full control over her personal life. Reason number one she wanted to be gainfully employed again as soon as possible. She’d known what she was getting herself into when she checked back into her old home, but really. She wasn’t a child anymore. Her right to not attend worship deserved respect. Getting up and dressed in time for morning prayers meant she didn’t have the luxury of solitude while she changed. Neither did Erna Haas. Seriously? Tanya muttered to herself, dragging her gaze away forcefully. This again? There was no point in denying it - she was hitting a dangerous age. In truth, it was far from the first time this had happened. The other instances she could chalk up to being under stress. Her mind had been eager to jump on anything that distracted her from the war, and her unlucky tentmate on the front had the misfortune of being very distracting. There really was nothing ruder than violating someone’s right to privacy, so she’d done her best to make sure her adjutant never suspected a thing. Tanya was sure the other woman would have reacted with the same horror she did that time she’d caught Grantz ogling her. Unlike Tanya, Visha was a proper lady once she was off the battlefield. She could even tell you the correct seating arrangement for a formal luncheon. A person like that wasn’t going to have a positive outlook on anything that violated social norms. Nothing was worth fracturing a good working relationship over. Erna would be at least as offended as Visha. Thankfully, the urge to let her eyes wander was a less frequent occurrence now than it had been during the end of the war. Erna had known her for longer, but that wouldn’t count for much. She’d been one of Tanya’s first cordial relationships in the orphanage during her childhood; the older girl had always kept her eye out for anyone trying to bully her. Ruining something like that would be pure stupidity. Erna had taken her vows to become one of the nuns a few months ago, so there was no question that her take on the subject of human desire was that it shouldn’t exist. If Tanya gave her any inkling of her thoughts, she’d be booted back to the common dormitory and have to go through an intervention. If she wanted to risk being banished from her only home, she could tell the truth. No amount of intervening would change anything. If the nuns wanted to blame anyone, they could talk to that God they prayed to. You couldn’t just unlearn years of going through life as a man. “Sorry,” Erna said quietly, jogging Tanya away from her thoughts. “I know I promised to get you a new pair of clothes if I could.” What a relief. She’d been caught staring, but Erna’s pure mind had jumped to another conclusion if she’d mistaken Tanya’s frown for anger that she hadn’t lived up to her word. Growing up, the orphanage had a decent amount of patronage, but nobody cared about soldiers’ orphans after losing a war. She could have taken a hand-me-down dress once she’d completely grown out of her last uniform, but so far, that hadn’t been necessary. The only real issue was the boys got first pick over pants and shirts. Tanya only got the leftovers. After an hour spent blocking out any religious messages and a few hours picking the last of the season’s crops from the small plot of land surrounding the orphanage, her afternoon was her own. The village of Karew, which had been incorporated into Berun proper a few months ago when the city limits expanded, wasn’t what she would call a happening place. In terms of its distance from the central city, it was roughly equivalent to where she’d originally grown up in Setagaya. But comparing the density of modern Tokyo to post-war Berun was deceptive. Karew had never even heard of a neighborhood planning commission. Basically, it was a disorganized group of settlements assigned an optimistically unified name. And the orphanage wasn’t anywhere close to what might be called the town center. Even though it was a long walk, Tanya went to retrieve a Sunday paper from the nearest shop. Knowledge was the most precious resource of all. Plus, more exercise was never a bad thing. Teenagers had plenty of excess energy, and the faster she fell asleep, the less time her mind would have to land on subjects it was best kept away from. It was no surprise that more than one front page article was devoted to the armistice. Honestly, hadn’t anyone learned a lesson about those? Even without her innate suspicion of the term, the way the Republic had violated theirs should have clued everyone else in that they were worthless. She’d heard that phrase about history repeating itself, but she never expected it to be so literal. The left-leaning party in power definitely wouldn’t be getting her vote in a few years, but they had one noble position - the war should have ended long before it did. Tanya had let herself fall prey to false hope that many of her fellow citizens felt the same way, but six months after the war finished, she’d needed to revise that position. The same people who’d so joyously celebrated the end of the war wanted to pretend they’d never said that, and complain about how everything wrong in the Empire was the fault of foreign powers. In some sense, they had a point. The Empire hadn’t proactively invaded anyone else. But a quick swat on the nose could have been given to any border violations without turning it into a full war. From there, the Empire could have worked with surrounding nations towards a long-term solution. And the Imperial treasury was definitely responsible for issuing all the debt they’d taken on. Anyone up in arms over the economy needed to take a look at who signed those paper certificates. Even if the facts were a little different, the overall situation wasn’t promising. A discontent German public in this era was a red flag so large it could block out the sun. She had to live in this country too. Or at least for the foreseeable future. If a second war wanted to come, it could do that after she’d lived out the rest of her life and departed peacefully from this world. At its root, it was an issue of government interference. The military budget had been allowed to supercede sound financial decisions, and the treasury had issued debt without any regard for how it would be repaid. When hard-working people were forced into poverty, of course they looked for a scapegoat. Well, if Tanya knew any government functionaries, she might be able to give them a suggestion or two so they could stop this before it got serious. Well-fed and productive people had no reason to turn to extremism. After the financial crisis in her old world, she’d gotten interested enough in economics to give the subject a thorough review. Ideas that were considered vanilla when she was reading them would be revolutionary today, plus, she had the benefit of remembering the vague details of previous economic fixes. Their country needed money, and only one other country was in a position to loan them enough. No bank worth its depositors’ trust would write a loan with no guarantee, so the Americans would need some real collateral. There were few enough sources of that when debt was sky-high, which meant it would have to come down to some inventive use of government goods. Unfortunately, the political parties with realistic economic plans were the same ones that supported the war, so associating with them would only cause problems in the long run. She couldn’t risk giving them political power via economic success. Come to think of it, Tanya considered, turning the page and catching a headline about what was left of the Imperial Army, General von Romel’s in charge of things now. He was always willing to listen. Someone with his title would have plenty of contacts in the treasury or at banks. Even more importantly, he’d have plenty of contacts who’d take a hiring recommendation from him seriously, Tanya realized, a grin tugging at her lips. The perfect solution to her lack of ready employment opportunity. Hunting for well-paid work from a small suburb without the benefit of the Internet was difficult, to say the least. Had she known how difficult, she may have chosen differently in the aftermath of the war. She’d counted on some name recognition, but the Army had only ever promoted how skilled she was at fighting. They’d conveniently forgotten to mention all the academic papers she’d written. She’d never considered herself to have a high tolerance for risk. Using her petty cash to stay in central Berun for a month or two to look for a job may have paid off, but if it hadn’t, she’d now be living on the streets without a pfennig to her name. Fourteen-year-old girls who looked like they were twelve didn’t make the top on anyone’s hiring list even when times were good. Getting her spot in the orphanage back before they were too poor to take on new charges had been of utmost importance. Once she'd turned sixteen, it had been time to see about making her way back off the welfare system. It was embarrassing it had taken her this long to realize her connections in the Army were still worthwhile. Romel might not be able to offer her a job himself, but that didn’t mean he was of no value to her anymore. So long as they were at peace, working in something closely linked to the Army wouldn’t be so bad, at least to get her career started. Everything besides the part where she was actually doing battle had been relatively interesting. Within the bounds of her orders she’d always been free to do as she pleased. Nunneries had rules for every last thing. Hold hands and say a prayer before you eat. So much time allotted for a bath, and the nuns still checked behind her ears to see if they were clean. Lights off at nine, no staying up to read past bedtime. No offensive language, even when you stubbed a toe so hard you thought it broke. For the first six months it had been bearable. She’d still been adjusting back to life off active duty. The placid lifestyle had been a perfect antidote to unwind all the pent up stress from years spent wondering if she’d live to see her next birthday. But lately, boredom was threatening to make her do something rash. Like pack up her meager belongings and march out the door with no plan for the future. Her next course of action would have to be dropping in on her old colleagues. She couldn’t discount them just because she couldn’t be a soldier any longer. The only question was when. Nobody liked a surprise meeting on a Monday, so tomorrow was out. If you were going for a good mood, Friday was best, but if you didn’t want anyone distracted by the clock, Thursday was better. That decided, Tanya gave a sigh of contentment and flopped back into her bed to finish the paper. A few hours later, she’d read, dined, and had a quick bath, even though they were short on soap at the moment. She sunk into bed with a feeling of purpose for the first time in months. 
 November 1, 1929General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 His watch ran fast. It was somewhat of a personal idiosyncrasy. His old pocket watch had done the same. Probably still would if he wound it up. But it reminded him too much of a world they could never go back to, so it sat unused in a cabinet at home. Perhaps the devices had taken pity on their wearer, and moved time forward more rapidly in an effort to help shorten the hours spent in the office. So he knew when he glanced down at his wrist that the clock face which read ten was wrong by almost a half-hour, and it wasn’t yet time to take one of the short intermissions that he enforced upon himself to break up the day. He’d been meaning to reset it back to the correct time, but even the few seconds needed to do that had escaped him for the last few months. Colonel Erich von Lehrgen had always worked hard. Brigadier General Erich von Lehrgen worked even harder, if that was at all possible. He’d hoped that with the conclusion of the war, free time would make a reappearance in his schedule. He liked to work, but it wasn’t the only thing he wanted to do with his days. That hope had been dashed as soon as he’d served a week in his new position. Managing one of the largest militaries in the world had been challenging. Trying to work within the limits now imposed on them was even more so. An hour later he made himself put his papers down and step out for coffee. Today, he’d be going out of the office completely, not just out his own doors and down the hall. Captain Elya Weber was already at the café when he arrived. Her orb may have been taken from her, but that made her only slightly less useful when gathering intelligence. She made her way up to Berun with some regularity, though officially she was stationed in Leibzich. Lehrgen wanted to trust the Intelligence reports he was handed each week, but it was always better to hear it straight from someone in the know. And besides, certain reports went directly to the police and bypassed his office entirely. The file that Elya handed off to him each time they met made up for that. “Smoke?” he asked her, once they’d both settled into chairs, knocking two cigarettes out of the pack. “Of course,” she smiled, and they both leaned their heads in for a light. “Anything important?” “It’s all in here,” Elya replied, drawing out a packet and handing it over to him. “It will look strange if you hand me a package and then we leave, you know,” Lehrgen laughed. “Things have quieted down some,” she shrugged. “Nobody likes to be out marching for their cause in the cold if they can help it. There’s not much to report that you don’t already know, except that your party isn’t going to win the next election.” “And how would you know who I’m voting for, Captain Weber?” “Let’s see,” she smiled, raising her hand to tick off points on her fingers. “From a landed family in the east, chose a career in the military-” He opened his mouth to object, but she kept going. “-but, you don’t mind compromising and I’ve yet to hear you say you think we should overthrow the government to reinstate the Kaiser. If you aren’t voting for the Volkspartei, I’ll buy you all the cigarettes you’ll smoke in the next year.” He took a gulp of his coffee in lieu of telling her that she was right. “I do hope your boyfriend knows he shouldn’t even think about getting away with something under your nose,” he replied, after he’d swallowed. “Things are going well?” “If I didn’t know better, I’d say you ask me about him so often because you’re hoping one day I’ll say we aren’t getting along,” she joked. “I ask because you’ll tell me regardless, so the least I can do is be polite,” he retorted. She blushed and hummed and looked away with a guilty smile. “I would be polite myself and ask after your life in return, but I wasn’t sure if you’d want the subject to turn to a Ms. Crawley.” “That was a long time ago,” he sighed, taking a deep inhale through his cigarette in relief. If that was the name she was bringing up, she hadn’t necessarily been keeping particularly close tabs on his personal life. She’d just apprised herself of any possible foreign connections before she’d decided to trust him. “So long ago that she’s Mrs. Pelham now.” “I heard you almost married her.” “I did.” “Why didn’t you?” “Because I was your age,” he said, with a rueful laugh, stretching his legs out under the table and leaning back slightly in his chair as he made himself comfortable while he indulged in some reminiscing. “What’s that supposed to mean?” Elya asked, clearly somewhat offended by the implication that she wasn’t mature enough to make serious decisions. “That I was still young enough to believe you could have the best of all worlds,” Lehrgen chuckled. It wasn’t often he got to see Elya off-kilter. “I had my pick of assignments, I could have stayed in the Commonwealth if I’d cared less about my career. I figured I could take the more ambitious path and find someone else once I’d settled back here.” “Do you regret it?” “Some days. But I’m sure if I’d chosen differently I’d give the same answer.” “Thought that a young officer rocketing up the ranks would have girls throwing themselves at him?” she joked. “Well, you should have seen me when I was younger. Had to lock the office door to keep them out,” he deadpanned. She caught his eye and gave a sniff of laughter, then turned her head away with a shake at his attempt at humor. “You know, you’re a bit fun when someone gets you off the subject of work.” “Well on that note, I’m afraid we have to get back to it,” he sighed, draining the last of his drink. “I did finally make a bit of headway on figuring out what happened to Ms. Serebryakov. The officer who took her prisoner has a good reputation. We can hope he did his best to keep her safe. Keep your chin up.” “Thanks,” Elya said quietly, a sad smile replacing the boisterous laugh. She knew as well as he did that it was foolish to put too much stock in an enemy soldier caring one way or another what happened to prisoners of war once they were taken off his hands. The twenty-minute break he gave himself was almost up, so he took his leave and headed back to the office. A piece of mail from yet another contact he trusted to keep him informed had arrived, this time from Ildoa. He opened it and unfolded the letter. The Empire wasn’t the only country with a restive populace. The Ildoan politicians had miscalculated and promised their people territory. When that had failed to materialize in the aftermath of the peace treaty, the turmoil had begun. Serves them right, he thought, putting the letter down and picking his work back up. Another hour later, someone knocked at his door, which he’d closed to review a few sensitive documents. He quickly shoved the classified items in a drawer, locked it, and called "come in" to whoever it was. "General," his adjutant saluted, "someone here to see you." Lehrgen looked at his calendar and frowned. He didn't have any appointments so far as he knew. "Well," Ernst corrected, "I think she came to see General von Romel originally, but he's not available." She was all he needed to hear to know who it was. There was only one woman, no, one person, who would show up unannounced thinking she could drop in on the chief of staff of her country's army like it was her due. As Romel himself had once called her, she was "invigoratingly arrogant". While describing her as arrogant was certainly true, Lehrgen wasn't sure what part of being subjected to Degurechaff's madness he was supposed to find invigorating. He had come to…appreciate was perhaps too favorable of a sentiment, but he hadn't hated working with her by the end. He’d been able to figure out a method of dealing with her that didn’t leave his stomach churning. He'd rather die than admit it out loud, but he would confess to missing her once in a blue moon, or at least missing how useful of a subordinate she'd been most of the time. Regardless, he'd been glad to be free of her when things were over. He'd found himself agreeing with her at times and then would have to wonder if she wasn't able to infect people with her specific strain of insanity. The last time Lehrgen saw her was at the state funeral. He hadn't been able to keep his face from morphing out of solemn grief and into impolite disbelief when he'd seen the tears roll down her cheeks. Even if in all likelihood she’d been crying for exactly the wrong reasons, that she was capable of the emotion at all was astonishing. The treaty had imposed strict limits on the number of soldiers on the books, so the Army had a problem of too many prospective recruits rather than too few. For now, the minimum age for service had been raised to the age of majority. As Degurechaff was nowhere near twenty, she’d had little choice but to return to her orphanage and wait until she was old enough to enlist again. She hadn't been the only disappearance from the General Staff Office. Part of the reason Lehrgen felt the pressure of his newest position so keenly was that two stalwart figures he’d relied on for years were no longer there to provide guidance. General von Rudersdorf never had been afraid of making difficult decisions. Someone had to publicly accept blame for the missteps made along the way. His old boss had graciously stuck his own neck out to prevent the Army from turning on itself in the aftermath. The only consolation was that the brave old man was by all accounts fully enjoying his voluntary exile in Waldstätte. They valued secrecy and gold more than upholding any sort of world order, so were perfectly happy to entertain discussions of receiving some industrial production relocated from the Lowlands, which the Empire had agreed to demilitarize and eventually grant independence to pending a future plebiscite. In his new position as liaison for Imperial industrial interests, Rudersdorf had like as not put on ten kilos as local companies threw lavish dinners in competition to sell to him. General von Zettour was too cunning to let the forced liquidation of the General Staff stop him. He’d re-established it in all but name. Figuring it would be suspicious to concentrate too many officers in the old building, the members had mostly been dispersed among regional armies. It made coordination slightly more difficult, but everyone had phones these days. Technically, Lehrgen was working at the headquarters for central command, but he doubted if a single person in the city had stopped referring to it as the General Staff Office. The braid he used to wear on his uniform was nowhere to be found, but in a smaller army, it wasn’t difficult to keep track of who was who. Among other niceties that Zettour had managed to exploit was the fact that it was nearly impossible for another country to audit which exact men were serving in the Army at any given moment. So long as the “official” copy of the enlisted men didn’t show too much turnover, it was quite easy to rotate men in and out under the table, which would allow for a well-trained reserve force. The Republic had eventually caught wind of some fudged numbers here and there, so the Imperial politicians had agreed to take measures. Zettour was relieved of his duties and they made a great show of forcing him to retire to the countryside, but no one ever got around to dismantling what he built, and Romel was quickly installed to replace him. Lehrgen wasn't exactly proud to be caught up in a nationwide act of deception, but his country needed more strength than it was allowed unless they wanted to be taken over by one of their neighbors one day. Frankly, Zettour's pseudo-retirement had made it easier for the military to exert silent control over certain sympathetic paramilitary groups that had grown out of the soldiers returning home to find that there weren't enough job openings to fill. If it was Zettour giving the direction, now that he was a private citizen the Reichswehr's hands were, on a technicality, clean. Though at least for now it seemed like Zettour was largely busying himself with studying the war and how it might have gone differently. There was at least one report of impressive length and detail mailed in each week. Lehrgen himself had ended up with an undeserved promotion on account of the leadership changes. While he was certainly up to the task, it still made him uneasy every so often when he sat down to think about it. Really, what sort of sad state did an army have to be in to make someone a general at thirty-six? With Zettour and Rudersdorf temporarily out of touch and Romel too busy for anything less than an emergency, he couldn't be wholly surprised that he'd been next on Degurechaff's list of targets. She probably still thought they were friends. Upon reflection, Lehrgen decided that maybe it was good Romel was busy. Those two working together was a recipe for another war in a few years. Romel wasn't itching to start hostilities back up as soon as the Imperial Army recovered back to a stable state, but the man had definitely enjoyed the challenges of war and would be susceptible to Degurechaff's goading. If aerial mages were still allowed, he wouldn’t put it past the other man to find some sort of exception for her. Lehrgen had the chance to head her off before she got to the top of the food chain. Still, he almost told his adjutant to make some excuse and turn her away. Talking to her was guaranteed to be unsettling, and life was difficult enough at the moment. But he hadn't had a…not a friend, but a trusted adviser to rely on, in months. He had people to consult, but no one with her borderline supernatural ability to predict the course of events, her gift for strategy and logic, her strangely reassuring manner of explaining things. He couldn't pass up the chance to pick the mind of someone who could actually give him answers. He leaned his head back, took a deep breath and then let out a long sigh. "Send her in," he told his adjutant. He'd at least see what she was here for. It was the third time he'd seen her out of uniform. She was wearing men's clothes, which somehow didn't surprise him: an overly large pair of pants that appeared to be made more of patches than any of the original material, cinched on tightly with a belt, boots that looked to be older than she was, and a button-down that had presumably once been white but was now a dingy gray. She had grown in the intervening months, but not enough that she threatened to ever be a tall woman. He'd estimate that she stood a shade under a meter and a half. And though she might no longer look like she belonged in the first half of primary school, she still looked nearly two years younger than sixteen. Her hair was shorter than she used to wear it, clipped into a bob that ended just below her ears. That sort of thing was coming into style among some of the younger ladies, but he very much doubted she was doing this because she'd suddenly decided she cared about fashion trends. She wasn’t wearing the short dress or heavy makeup that usually accompanied, so he had to assume it was out of practicality. The cut was a bit uneven, and had been neatly combed, but wasn't arranged in any particular manner. It also looked like it would benefit from a thorough wash. Overall, the impression her appearance gave was not one that said she was living a life anyone dreamed of having. Except for her eyes. Her eyes hadn't changed at all, and if they had, it was only to show visible evidence of a burning passion to do something more with herself, an emotion that put that same old fear in the pit of his stomach. She stared, unabashed and unafraid, calculating and cool as ever, right through him. "Lieuten-Ms. Degurechaff," he greeted. "Thank you for seeing me, General von Lehrgen. And my congratulations on earning that title," she began, starting off politely. "Thank you, though we both know it would be a mistake to say I earned it. If I remember correctly, you are still more than three years too young to be assuming your own position back, so I must presume you're here for another reason?" he asked, getting straight to the point. He did not have time to waste idly chatting, and of all the people to idly chat with, she was not high on his list. "I – I've been looking for work," she said, gaze softening into something less prideful at his direct question as she looked down at her feet and shuffled them. "Might I ask why?" Lehrgen queried. Legally she should still be a ward of the state. Combined with whatever cash she’d saved from her years working, she should have enough to live comfortably enough. She had every reason to take it easy and try to finish out the rest of her childhood normally. Unless, of course, that isn’t possible for her, Lehrgen sighed to himself, the phrase “it’s the only path for me” that he’d seen written on her enrollment application all those years ago flashing through his mind as he suppressed a shudder at the thought that she was still so attached to that life of violence she’d originally wanted for herself. “After having my own discretion for so long it’s been difficult to adjust back,” she explained. He nodded with some amount of sympathy. Anyone who knew anything about Tanya Degurechaff could have told you that fitting into civilian life would give her trouble. “Without something to put my mind to, I’m afraid I might go mad soon,” she continued, with a short huff of laughter. “I don’t know what I’d do.” “We can’t have that,” Lehrgen said, trying to keep his voice steady despite the icy hand that had just grabbed at his heart. The vindication that he was right about what she was doing there was little solace. He checked in with the police that patrolled the district near her orphanage every so often to make sure there was no suspicious activity. From what it sounded like, their lives were about to get interesting. “Even with all the orders, the Army was less restrictive than the orphanage,” Degurechaff said, shaking her head in annoyance. “I couldn’t always do exactly as I liked, but at least some of the time I was being paid for things I could be passionate about.” I’d forgotten what this felt like, Lehrgen thought, wishing he didn't know exactly where her passions lay. When Degurechaff had been a more frequent fixture in his life, she’d loomed larger, and most of the time it had been easy to forget that she was a small girl. Seeing her again when he’d least expected it had reminded him how pathetic it ought to feel to be afraid of her. It had been well over a year since he’d sat across from the diminutive blonde and felt so helpless. “And, well, I get on fine with my roommate, but I’d like to do away with having one. I’m sure most people could understand that.” “Right,” he gulped, as he wondered how permanently this unsuspecting girl was going to be done away with. “Living on your own would be for the best.” “Exactly,” Degurechaff nodded. “With the age restriction for service I’ve tried my luck a few other places, but,” she paused, heaving a great sigh. “I grew up in the Army, General. When it comes to the usual, I can't cook much of anything besides camp food, can't sew unless it's to replace a button, and being a nanny would be a farce for me and a travesty for my charge. Everything I'm qualified for they want to hire a man to do, or at least someone older, or pay me too little to be worth the effort," she finished, face twisting into bitter displeasure. "I suppose looking like this they think I'll take a pittance." He raised an eyebrow. "I find it hard to believe no one wants to employ a national hero." He doubted she'd pick up on the sarcasm. Hard as it was for him to swallow, certain right-leaning publications had taken to lauding Degurechaff as an example of what all citizens should strive to become. "Most people don't believe me," she muttered, "they think it was all propaganda. The few that do think I'm only skilled in aerial combat and little else." She cleared her throat and glanced at her feet again for a second, and he could see that asking for help was costing her dearly. "I believe you know that I'm a capable employee in many other respects, so if you know anyone that you might recommend me to, I would appreciate it." He didn't think he knew anyone that was prepared to handle her. He'd only been able to do so because of the strict hierarchy in place. She would terrorize a normal workplace. But it felt unfair to turn her away without trying to help. Not unfair to her, but to the rest of the world. "Let me think," he told her. "I'll…" he drifted off. He’d been intending on saying he was going to get back to her, after he gave some serious thought to what industry she could be shoved in to cause a minimum of possible disruption, but while he had her there, it was possible she'd be interested in discussing some of the convoluted issues awaiting his decision. "If you have time to wait, I wouldn't mind hearing your thoughts on some of the matters before me," he told her, beginning to gather his papers into piles by subject. "I'm happy to advise, General, but I'm not in a position to work for free, you know." Of course she wouldn't give anything freely, he muttered to himself. Generosity of spirit was not something he'd ever imagined her capable of. He was about to ask what she considered a fair hourly rate, but another thought struck him. She was looking for a job. He was badly in need of assistance. There were far fewer officers in the Truppenamt than there had been on the General Staff, so everyone's workload was correspondingly larger. So long as he kept a tight leash on her, keeping her close at hand was arguably the best choice, at least until he figured out what else she might find interesting enough to distract her from whatever dark impulses she was struggling with. If he wasn't careful, she'd start a goddamned revolution left to her own devices. Ambition and genius mixed with boredom was a toxic recipe. "Would you be interested in working for me again?" he asked her. She began to nod and then paused. "I can't, I'm not old enough," she said, nod morphing into a shake of her head. "Not to be enlisted, no,” he agreed. “But very few of the women in the office are. The typists and secretaries aren't officially on the rolls." He saw the realization dawn in her eyes, and continued before she could raise an objection. "It might seem insulting, after being a well-respected Lieutenant Colonel, but I won't have you make my coffee or pick up my dry-cleaning, for what it's worth. I already have an adjutant, so I don't need a personal assistant." She didn't say anything, just waited for him to make an official proposal. Her cool demeanor made her a good negotiator. Didn't give anything away, just let him make an offer without jumping at it. "I'll find some advisory title to give you," he continued, sure she would find a term like file-clerk below her. She did have an ego. "And everyone will know that regardless, you should be accorded the respect due to your former rank." She looked pleased, but remained silent, giving him a nod but otherwise remaining impassive. "I'll see to it that your compensation matches your value, which I expect you know is rather high." At that statement, her eyes came alight with a glow he could only describe as unholy. Maybe this is a bad idea, he thought. Anything that she was this excited about was probably a bad idea. She stuck her hand out with a genuine smile on her face. He stood up and shook it, and then escorted her to the officer in charge of personnel so they could hammer out the details, wondering once again, for a moment, if this was wise. He hadn’t lost a single bit of the reservations he’d once had about her, but he knew he'd be a fool to lose someone as talented as she. He'd have to keep a better eye on her than Zettour and Rudersdorf had done, curb her worst inclinations. But so far as he'd been able to tell, once he started assessing her with a more objective eye, she was generally earnestly helpful, if badly misguided when it came to using her own intuition. So long as she had someone to guide her, this arrangement might not be doomed to turn out poorly. When things were settled, she came back to his office, propped her elbows on his desk, and with avid interest, began to advise. Lehrgen called his adjutant in after a few minutes to have him cancel his remaining plans for the afternoon, already sure this was going to be a long and fruitful discussion. He had lunch brought in for both of them, treating them each to a glass of imported Gewürztraminer along with it. "Well, here's to hoping working together this time ends better than the last," she said as a toast, clinking glasses with him. He smiled ruefully but appreciatively. It would be nice to have someone else who saw things differently. Even if it was mixed with possible homicidal tendencies. She ate greedily but neatly and gave a polite thanks at the end of the meal. Hunger no longer distracting them, they talked and disagreed and strategized and ruminated. For hours she sat poring over documents, maps, and briefings, rarely looking at him, engrossed with whatever was on the table in front of her. She was understandably knowledgeable on military matters, but as the conversation touched other subjects she showed a breathtaking depth of knowledge on matters ranging from monetary policy to scientific research to the intricacies of foreign political relations. Her strange…aura…the charisma, the occasional impudence, the bizarre mixture of teenaged girl and consummate adult, the rare glances into the deepest part of her eyes that had a drive and implacability so terrifying she might be able to put the fear of Tanya into God, the raw intelligence coupled with a studiousness that he was grudgingly impressed by, the dry humor, they all melded together to create the insidious pull of Tanya. Perhaps he'd come to regret this. One on one, it would be all too easy to be drawn irresistibly into her flawed way of thinking by virtue of the logical arguments that coated it. As the day drew to a close, Lehrgen halted the spirited back-and-forth in favor of clearing up a few practical matters. “You’re on the clock at eight,” he told her, putting the papers they’d been reading away. She hesitated for a moment, her eyes looking blankly up towards the ceiling like she was making a mental calculation. “Will that be a problem?” he asked, when she didn’t immediately reply. She shook her head. “Just thinking what time I’ll need to leave home by.” “If I were you I’d take the weekend to find something better connected to the rest of the city,” he advised. She winced slightly. “About that…” “Yes?” “Does the Army still have dormitories in the city?” “You aren’t a soldier anymore Degurechaff,” he reminded her, a touch sharply. “Then would it be possible to request an advance on my next paycheck?” "I know it wasn't a fortune, but I was under the impression the Army paid you for the work you did," he said, with a questioning look. "You never struck me as having either the time or inclination to spend much of what you made. Surely you should have something saved up." "My money was held with the Army's bank. It seemed safer than any of the private institutions," she said. "As far as I heard the money was released to anyone that was owed it as soon as everything was worked out," he replied, still confused. "Yes," she said, angrily gripping a pen, "except for soldiers who were under sixteen. In that case the money was released to their next of kin. My next of kin is the Empire's welfare services division. And now they've gone and changed it again anyway, I'll have to wait until I'm twenty. By then inflation will probably have eaten away at the majority of it." He couldn't say he was entirely surprised that the state had frozen the accounts over which it could make a thin legal argument for trusteeship. The government wasn't picky about where its money came from these days. He had faith they'd reimburse her when the time came, but at the moment the money was almost certainly not there awaiting withdrawal. He sympathetically wrote out a check equal to her first month of pay, telling her to consider it a small starting bonus. She at least deserved something for coming to call on him before she gave into any worse impulses. As he did so, he continued to chat with her over the minutiae of her new position, over which a small argument ensued when they reached the subject of clothing. "You can't wear a uniform anymore, so I do expect you to be dressed appropriately on Monday," he told her. "My pants will be pressed to perfection," she promised. "Degurechaff, it feels strange to have to remind you of this, but you are a woman. Women wear dresses and skirts to work." "Pants are easier to get around in," she complained. "You'll be sitting at a desk all day, not marching through fields. I'm sure a skirt will be perfectly practical," he countered. "Sir, if they were more practical than pants, they'd come as part of a standard issue uniform," she replied, smile tugging at her lips at the thought. The image of Imperial soldiers doing their exercises so dressed was too funny to argue with. Sensing that winning this battle would be more trouble than it was worth, he agreed that so long as her clothes were clean and correctly sized, she could wear what she liked come Monday. After she left, he drummed his fingers on the table a few times, for the first time in months in want of something pressing to take care of. He picked up one of the papers she’d written notes on to file it away, pausing for a second and raising an eyebrow when he glanced at her handwriting. Everything was penned neatly and legibly, with the exception of an unusual amount of ink blots, and that was the strangest part of it. Only children tried to write their letters out the way one saw them printed in a book instead of using their own form of script. Any letters that were joined together in a grouping appeared to be unintentional, a line dragged haphazardly between them, the result of not lifting the pen far enough off the page. I suppose she missed out on that part of her education, he thought, with a pitying shake of his head as he stood up to go drop in on General von Romel and let him know not to be shocked when he saw Degurechaff wandering around the office again. Lehrgen corrected himself a moment later - she’d intentionally foregone that part of her education in favor of getting lessons in combat. She had no need of pity. God grant me the strength to put up with her, he prayed, to a deity he didn’t really believe in. He had a feeling there would be many days he needed to imagine there was something more powerful than he that stood between Degurechaff and some form of disaster. 




 

 Seven Years of Bad Luck






 
 "He has no enemies, but is intensely disliked by his friends."
 
 December 1, 1929Moabitte, Imperial Capital Berun
 A satisfying click of the lock. A turn inwards to sweep eyes over factory-fresh furniture. A deep inhale of clean air, ever so slightly tinged with the scent of quince. A few steps, a hand tipping a bottle of wine to meet a glass, and then a tannic bitterness on the tongue while settling into a chair beside floor-to-ceiling windows, below which the cherry blossoms in the local park were beginning to bud. It was how every newly-rented apartment should greet its latest tenant. Or at least it had been how the last apartment with her name on the lease had treated her. A different name, Tanya Degurechaff reminded herself. The monotonous tranquility of sitting behind a desk day in and day out with no end in sight was almost enough to make her feel like her life had never suffered any interference from irrational entities to begin with. Her new apartment was a definite departure from the ones she’d rented in her previous life. One small step forward for Tanya Degurechaff, but one giant leap backwards for me, she thought, with a sardonic smile. The best she could say about her new abode was that humble as it might be, it was several times better than a tent, and a modest improvement from a shared room in a nunnery. Her lock took some convincing to make it slide home. A good scour and oiling would take care of that. If not, she’d have some words with the landlord. Most of her furniture had seen previous owners. It was well-made and built to last, so once she’d given it a thorough scrub, that wouldn’t be an issue. Nobody had heard of the term “planned obsolescence” yet. There was nothing wrong with the smell, but something about it indisputably said “lived in”. She could buy a candle if it came down to it. Floor-to-ceiling windows wouldn’t be in vogue for years to come, and all her window looked out on was a concrete courtyard. That she didn’t mind so much. Even in the winter, she preferred to sleep with a window cracked, and this way it would be quiet. Red wine of similar quality to what she’d inaugurated her last residence with would be imported and thus expensive, so there was no wine. She could have bought a half-decent white, but that would have been besides the point, so it would have defeated the purpose of buying anything at all. All the same, Tanya settled into her chair with a plate of food just as satisfied as she’d been with her previous rental. If she could already afford her own apartment at sixteen, it wouldn’t be arrogant to think that by thirty-six she might have climbed to a higher socioeconomic status she’d attained in her previous life. Rock bottom wasn’t so bad. She could have rented something more expensive. Her salary was more than decent, especially considering that it was adjusted regularly for inflation. Technically, she’d made more as a lieutenant colonel, but that was only on account of the hefty amount of hazard pay. Hour-for-Mark, she was certainly coming out on top now. A more expensive apartment would mean one of two things: a larger space, which was entirely unnecessary, or a less central location, which would have done nothing but extend her commute. If she’d been willing to put up with that, she would have just stayed on at the orphanage until she turned eighteen and was given the choice of becoming a nun or getting booted out. The only complaint she had about her neighborhood was in regards to the other residents. Almost all of central Berun leaned hard to the left. It was very possible the people sharing a wall with her had voted for the Communist Party in the last election. As unfortunate as that fact was, she counted on remaining blissfully unaware of the truth. In her last building, she’d only been acquainted with a handful of the other tenants. Mostly those who had retrieved their mail at the same time she had, back when she had been unequivocally a he. He had gone five years without knowing the names of the family next door to him after he’d moved to Hiroo. All he’d really known about them was that they’d had a grandchild they watched occasionally so its parents could enjoy a night alone. He hadn’t known that for a fact, but it was what he’d assumed when he’d heard those obnoxious cries on those occasional Saturday nights. If Tanya could just keep that streak up, she’d never be the wiser that her cohabitants weren’t voting for a reasonable centrist. At night, the downtown parts of Berun could get a bit rowdy. It was a concern, but not one that she'd let sway her decision away from a good deal. Between the hours of ten-thirty at night and six-thirty in the morning, her only plans were to be deeply asleep. Her apartment was built for safety, and she’d taken a room on the top level. Only someone with a personal grudge came up to the sixth floor. That consideration had flitted through her mind. Tanya Degurechaff wasn’t a name anyone could call ‘beloved’ of the Communist Party. A personal point of pride, but a potential danger. With the drastic haircut and the fact that she no longer looked like a child, so long as she didn’t introduce herself to anyone with unfortunate political leanings, she would be nothing more than another nondescript blonde. Well, maybe spending that extra money on a better place wouldn’t matter much, Tanya thought with a slight groan, as she finished off the last of the mushrooms she’d sautéed a few minutes before. No, she reminded herself firmly. It was hard to be an optimist after everything she’d been through, but she’d at least maintain herself as a pragmatist. Her country hadn’t entered an inflationary spiral yet. She walked over to the mostly-barren bookcase against a wall, smiling at the thought of having five or more of them. These were the days when having a private study was almost middle-class. It wouldn’t be long. From the shelf, she drew out the economic proposal she’d typed up. Keying it had been a laborious process. Typewriters were much less eager to obey than computer keyboards. But typing was a skill that would only become more in demand with time, so she’d seen no reason to put off learning. Tanya paged through her proposal a last time. She’d had to make some calculations she had minimal confidence in at the end. She could talk up her ideas all she liked, but without at least a few numbers on the page, it would all sound like bluster. She had to give the Americans some reason to think this would benefit them. Truthfully, the proposal wasn’t without some risk. American money was bound to run out at some point. But the Imperial economy was more in need of emergency stimulation than it was long-term assistance. There wasn’t much point in worrying about your country devolving into ruin ten years in the future when you could worry about it devolving into ruin tomorrow instead. Besides, she wasn’t advocating for continued dependence on the States for a reason. Only enough to get them out of the mess they were in now. She’d take a slowly-regrowing economy over one that rode high for a few years only to crash spectacularly a few years later any day. Incremental improvement was always the most sustainable. Putting the papers back, she readied herself for bed. No competition for the sink, she could soak in her tub as long as she liked, and she used a brand new towel for what might have been the first time in her entire life. All in all, not a bad way to end the day. The Empire was a logical country, she reassured herself, pulling her sheets back and climbing into bed in a room that was hers and hers alone. Anyone who saw her notes could be expected to understand their value, even if it looked unorthodox at first glance. She would count on that to hold true for her new country as well. If her contacts came through for her, there was a chance she wouldn’t need to worry that her cash would become worthless the day after she received it. The mattress under her and the roof above her wouldn’t be considered luxury goods in the not-so-near future. Most people would listen to reason if you gave them the chance. 
 December 10, 1929General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 Erich von Lehrgen considered himself a smart man. He would never want to come across as arrogant, but there was no sense in being modest to the point of lacking self-awareness. Compared to the average person, he was conscious of the fact that he came out ahead. Most of his academic life had been spent waiting for his peers to catch on to concepts he'd grasped with ease. This, he was belatedly realizing, had left him singularly ill-prepared to deal with the person sitting in front of him. He simply had no experience in managing the sensation of being completely lost on a certain subject. Even knowing that Tanya Degurechaff was what was commonly defined as a genius, her expertise on every matter she put her mind to was stupefying. Blinking a few times in response to his bewilderment, Lehrgen flipped back to the beginning of the report on his desk so that he could page through the detailed proposal Degurechaff had handed him for a second time. Seeing as how leaving her to her own devices had fared so well the last time her superior officers had tried it, he’d felt it prudent to schedule regular meetings with her. Too much oversight and he’d never get anything done, but he couldn’t afford to assign her a project and only speak to her about it when she delivered the final results. Without fail, that had ended in tasks completed in ways no one had imagined or wanted. A consistent check-in would make sure she stayed on track. Tuesdays and Thursdays, an hour after lunch, he blocked off two hours and allowed her to invade his office. Apparently, despite the hefty workload he’d already assigned her, it hadn’t been enough to satisfy her. After today’s meeting had finished, she’d leaned down, drawn a miniature thesis out of her bag, and dropped it on the desk between them. "General," she'd said, upon noticing his confusion at the title, "I understand this isn't part of your job, but I hoped you might know someone to pass this along to." To say that it wasn't a part of his job would be an understatement on the order of calling the eruption at Pompei "a spot of bad weather". Financial matters were well outside the purview of his role. He was familiar enough with things like departmental budgets, and understood investments to a degree, but he was not a sophisticated financier in either his professional or personal life. Until a few minutes ago, he would have guessed that was one of the few traits he shared with Degurechaff. What she was proposing - or at least so far as he could even divine what was going on - was a way to assist the government in paying off its war debts. There hadn’t been enough gold to finance the war, an issue which anyone could have seen coming if they’d had the foresight to know how large it would grow. After the resumption of war by the Republic, an emergency measure had been passed to suspend convertibility of bills into gold. New paper notes had replaced the old, and made it easy to inject more capital to pay for soldiers and weaponry as needed, the amount no longer constrained by reserves. That was the first problem Degurechaff’s paper took aim at, as she delivered what would have been a blistering polemic, if not for the academic wording, on how an inescapable disaster might befall their currency. An immediate return to gold would be ruinous, but she didn’t advocate that at all. She gave her support to one side of the debate raging in the Treasury on that count. The main body of her work was in regards to using foreign capital investments to cover what they could. Theoretically, her paper looked sound to Lehrgen. That was about as useful as his opinion on whether a submarine had been built to withstand the pressure it would encounter several hundred meters under the ocean. He would notice obvious cracks in the hull, but no sane captain would board it until it had been checked by someone with an engineering degree. He couldn't rightly pass this along if he couldn't trust it had value. "Degurechaff," he started skeptically, "may I ask how you came up with this idea?" "I had plenty of time to myself to think at the orphanage," she replied promptly. "I didn't realize orphanages kept collections of books on esoteric finance," he said pointedly, glancing once again at the paper that was full of the type of hand-drawn tables and projections usually left to someone who'd trained long enough in the science to be a PhD candidate. She shifted in her seat. "I studied it during my free time. Before I had to go back." "The front must have been more leisurely than I remember," he retorted. "During War College," she clarified. He opened his mouth to press the issue. A normal War College curriculum was two years. Hers had been accelerated to a bare six months. That should have left very little time to pursue academic interests outside her assigned studies. Even a genius had to have time to do the necessary background reading. Drop it, he told himself after a second. He’d drive himself mad trying to explain each and every quirk. Plus, she was looking increasingly uncomfortable with his line of questioning. He didn't want her to stop coming to him with outlandish thoughts because she thought she'd get grilled each time. Her outlandish thoughts were what he'd hired her for. "You're confident in your knowledge of this subject?" She nodded. "Yes, sir." “What got you interested?” he asked out of curiosity. “Oh,” she said, perking up in her seat, “nothing important, really. Just a better understanding of how to fund the life I want to make for myself. I’ll never be able to get back on track if our finances stay the way they are.” When she says it like that, you almost have to respect her dedication, Lehrgen laughed to himself. It wasn’t as though he’d thought a month sitting behind a desk would exert some mystical force over her and turn her into a pacifist. There was being an optimist, and then there was being an idiot. Still, only the most devoted of hobbyists took the time to go into a subject so tangential to their true interests. If anything, this only proved the wisdom of hiring her. Her ideas themselves weren’t bad. Just their intentions. Degurechaff might want to use an improved economy to fund another war, but so long as someone was there to moderate her, only the useful bits needed to leave his office. “Well, I can tell you that for now the only thing the Army will be doing with any extra room in the budget is restoring ourselves to a state where our national defense isn’t under threat,” he reprimanded her. Once the Empire had been bounded on all sides by other powers of Europaen significance, its doctrine had morphed into a defensive one. Some of the officers, especially the older ones, longed for a return to expansionist policies, but they were the minority. Degurechaff was overdue for a reminder that stretching the physical limits of their country to span the continent had never been a policy goal. She had paused for a moment at the admonition, but gave him a grin a second later. “Of course, sir. And from there, we’ll be able to make our way forward.” Did she never learn the phrase ‘good enough’? Lehrgen wondered idly. Trying to grow beyond that and inciting the other powers to give war another go would be more accurately described as making their way backwards instead of forwards. Not that there were no revisions to borders he’d make if he had the chance. For one, separating Ostria proper from the rest of the Empire simply because of historical precedent had ignored that a majority of both populations desired to be united. And besides, their economies had become integrated enough that the separation had been painful, to say the least. “A question from someone unfamiliar with these matters, if I may?” he asked, moving along after deciding he’d get nowhere trying to change her mind on the proper use of funds. “Of course, sir. Happy to answer.” “Most of our debts are owed internally as far as I’ve heard. Shouldn’t we be able to manage that ourselves? We’re putting our economy at the mercy of foreign credit this way.” The reaction he got to the question made him raise his eyebrows briefly. There was nothing unusual about it, but the person in front of him was anything but usual. I don’t think I’ve ever seen her at a loss before, Lehrgen thought. Tanya rolled her head from one side to the other, like even for her trying to distill an hours-long lecture into a few sentences was a challenge. “We’re already at the mercy of foreign credit,” she began. “Our economy isn’t self-sufficient.” She paused and glanced at him, and he nodded to indicate he was following. “The Mark was never a currency of international trade, even before the war. Now, most foreign creditors won’t take it, and those that will charge too much of a premium to sustain. If we’re stuck trying to purchase foreign goods at those levels, it could still push us towards rapid devaluation, no matter what we do internally.” “The American economy is strong and people will trust it if we pay in dollars,” Lehrgen concluded. “Exactly. Dollars will keep us solvent in the credit markets.” “Couldn’t we just default?” he asked. “At least on some portion of it? We don’t owe a huge balance externally, it shouldn’t scare off foreign investment for years to come. So long as we make good on our debts as best we can, nobody reasonable can ask for more.” “You have more experience dealing with them, but at least in my lifetime, the Republic hasn’t been known for acting reasonably. We owe them reparations payments.” “Which you’re in favor of paying?” Lehrgen questioned, as soon as he’d recovered from his jaw attempting to drop to the floor. That Tanya, of all citizens, considered those a priority was too absurd to put into words. Looking at their international obligations, reparations were an area where it seemed easiest to justify a lesser settlement. The Imperial treasury had issued debt which it was obligated to repay to the best of its ability. But the Empire had never asked for the war. The Republic bore the blame for starting one they couldn’t win. “What I meant, sir,” she replied, clearing her throat, “is that the consequences of default could be severe. The Republic may decide they’d like payment in kind. Much of our industry lies close to that border.” The Republic is in no position for armed intervention, Lehrgen thought. If it weren’t for the Americans, the Republican Army wouldn’t exist. Though, as Degurechaff had mentioned, it wouldn’t be the first time they’d acted rashly. She had been the one to predict that irrational evacuation of theirs. “That is worth considering,” he nodded. “The worst thing would be to invite a conflict we aren’t ready for. The Republic may decide to take more than financial retribution for Arene.” Lehrgen gulped. To imagine his fellow citizens subjected to such things was unconscionable. Quickly, he scribbled a note on the final page of the paper in front of him as a reminder. If the subject of their reparations ever came up among his politically-minded friends, he’d have to pass that warning on. Avoiding a repeat of that debacle was something the entire country could agree on. “So, between this and what the Reichsbank already has planned, you think it will put us back to normal operation?” he asked, humoring her with a touch of a smile. Regardless of her motivations, she was showing a spectacular willingness to help. “Not entirely, sir,” she said hesitantly. “We issued too much paper. Our citizens that own bonds will still have to take a loss, but it’s better to dent a household budget than destroy it. I suppose we could start a campaign asking those who can spare the money to tear up their certificates, but that will be a hard sell. Now, if we asked after we won a war-” “No point in speculating,” Lehrgen interjected. The answer to financial ills brought on by losing a war did not need to be starting a war they could win. “Do you know anyone who could give this a read?” Degurechaff asked hopefully. “I’ll see what I can do,” he promised. If her strange notions on finance were a tenth as useful as her strange notions on military matters, he ought to at least give her a shot to talk to someone who could give her paper proper consideration. He shouldn't limit her to only giving opinions on the state of the army if she wanted to offer them on a broader range of subjects. The trouble was, for all of Lehrgen's connections, it wasn't as though he was friends with every government minister. Realizing that he would likely be the limiting factor for her ideas gave him the unusual feeling of being rather useless. He was determined he'd find someone to push this onto so his own subordinate couldn't look down on him. He might not be able to think of a likely candidate off the top of his head, but he was sure he knew someone who knew someone. And that someone wouldn’t brush off a General in the Army without thinking about it. “One last thing,” he said as she got up to leave, reminded of something that had been left undone. “I never got the chance to apologize for what I said to you before you left to stop the assault on Kyev.” She froze for a second, looking startled by the confession. “You spoke the truth,” was all she said in return, waving it off. "Even without parents, I'm sure you felt yourself part of a family at one point,” he offered. He didn't really believe that. His investigation into her orphanage all those years ago had concluded that while she hadn't gone out of her way to be mean to the other children, she had lacked the natural instinct to bond with her peers. It would be rude to suggest anything of the sort in the middle of giving an apology, though. "A long time ago," she replied, with a humorless sniff of laughter that he didn’t understand, contradicting every expectation he had of how she’d reply. "So long ago that it feels like another lifetime." For the shortest moment, she looked - what had Serebryakov called it that one time? - forlorn. It was gone in an instant, so quickly he told himself he must have been seeing things. "And your family?" she questioned. In all honesty, he was shocked she remembered. He doubted she really cared, but that she’d cared enough to even store it away as something to ask about later was rather impressive, given her typical unconcern over others. He gave a sideways rock of his head to indicate a so-so outcome. "My brother and his family made it through fine. My parents didn't," he said shortly. She didn't need to know the details, and probably didn't want them in any case. She nodded grimly, and then gave a wry smile. "I wouldn't have pegged you as being from the east," she said, "you're much too educated." It was true that the common people in the eastern reaches of the Empire had a reputation for being less cultured than those to the west, the rural lands slower to change than the large cluster of cities near Rhine and Ruhr. But his family hadn’t been a part of the peasantry. Or the working class, as they were now called. "It’s not so impressive,” he said, with a good-humored sigh. “All the estates employ tutors.” Her eyebrows shot up in surprise, and he wondered if he needed to be insulted, given that it was so amazing to hear he’d been brought up well. "I never would have guessed. You worked harder than almost anyone else. Still do.” “What’s that have to do with it?” “Very few of us deserve the positions we were born into.” Her somewhat cross tone made him think she was less trying to pay him a compliment than complain about her own unfair circumstances, but still, he smiled a bit. She was difficult to impress, but he thought this time he might have managed it. He waved her out, and sat down to make a few calls. It took almost two weeks, but he finally tracked someone down who was high enough up at the Reichsbank to make a difference, a Rudolf Fischer. As soon as he heard the news, he went to find Degurechaff. “Do you think you could get another one of these typed up?” he asked, handing the proposal that he’d kept back to her. “That way I can send it on to Fischer before the meeting.” “Of course, sir,” she said brightly, taking the papers from him. “When do you need it by?” “As soon as it can be done,” he replied. “No later than the end of the week.” With the Christmas holiday starting tomorrow and New Year’s not long after, plenty of the typists would be on leave, so it would be best for her to submit the request right away if they wanted it completed in the interim. “I’ll get right on it,” she promised. xXx Tanya Degurechaff waited until her door was shut before she let herself shake her fists in victory. If she argued her case right, their economy would be as stable as it could be, given the circumstances. No less importantly, she had the chance to impress a few bankers. Once her name was in the papers for brilliant business ideas, she’d finally have more than one institution willing to employ her. Threatening to switch to a career in finance would make the coming year’s salary negotiations a breeze. Even better, she’d managed to assuage one worry on her mind - the Army’s stance on another war. The Imperial Army had been a defensive army. With the way that had ended for them, it was possible they’d switched gears into thinking something as stupid as “the best defense is a good offense” could work to win back what they’d lost. When you saw steps being taken towards some rearmament, you had to wonder where they planned on stopping. Luckily, their main takeaway must have been that they should have stuck to their border defense plan to begin with. She was in full agreement that the Army needed to be stronger than they were now, no matter what measures they had to take to get there. If they didn’t do something, sooner or later her country would be overrun by communists as they made their way west. To that end, Tanya was happy to help. Once they got to a defensible position and an improved economy had calmed the passions of angry voters, she could move on to private industry with no regrets. Her country would be safe, but not on a path to conquer anyone. It had worried her a bit to hear the anger in Lehrgen’s tone at admitting that they were going to do nothing more than stabilize their borders. Coupled with the shock he had betrayed at the thought that a patriotic citizen would consider paying reparations a duty, she’d have to be careful to make sure she had sound reasoning behind anything that reeked of pacifism. The Army might not be openly courting another war, but Lehrgen was still a man who had a deep-rooted belief in the righteousness of the Imperial state. When his home and family had been damaged by the war, it wasn’t hard to see why certain new realities were hard for him to stomach. When she came in the next day despite it being a holiday, her mood towards her boss was still forgiving. In the Army, “as soon as it can be done” had always meant “yesterday”. Asking her to work over Christmas to type up a second copy of her paper wasn’t the type of heartless order she usually associated with him. She’d take it as a good sign that he considered her work so important to restoring his pride in their nation. It wasn’t as though she had any plans for Christmas as opposed to another day off. In some ways, it was best to have an excuse to avoid the crowds celebrating an enemy she hated more than the Republic or the Federation. Plus, she thought, knitting her hands together over her head to stretch her arms and give her fingers a break, a check through Lehrgen’s papers while most everyone’s out won’t hurt. Privacy was of utmost importance in a civilized world, but nobody’s privacy outranked her personal safety. There was always the chance that he was keeping certain re-mobilization plans from her until she proved herself trustworthy. Some extra caution was warranted. And without security cameras, all she had to worry about was putting things back the way they’d been left. She took a folder along with her, just in case she needed to make the excuse that she was dropping something off. Even that was highly unlikely. There had been guards at the door to the office and she’d passed two receptionists who’d been assigned the duty of waiting in case of emergency calls, but nobody had come down the hallway in the two hours she’d been there. She strode down from her own office with purpose, made a quick check over both shoulders to make sure she was alone, and quietly turned the knob. As was to be expected, there was more than one locked drawer in his desk. Nonetheless, a quick glance through the incoming and outgoing trays confirmed there was nothing major to worry about. Large-scale plans would have been difficult to hide completely. At least for now, she could put that fear to rest. Lehrgen was meticulously neat, which she gave a small grin of thanks for. She didn’t have to replicate some random jumble of papers to put them back in order. Ah, well, that’s the best Christmas present I could ask for, she told herself, returning to her own office to continue the slow progress she was making on her typing. The future was only looking up. 
 January 6, 1930General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 I’ll need to sleep with my window closed tonight, Lehrgen thought to himself, peering out a window in his office to see branches waving as winter wind howled through them. So long as the weather cooperated, he liked keeping one cracked at night even during the colder parts of the year, but tonight he’d have to make an exception. His gaze trailed to the other window, a mostly similar scene with slightly different trees playing out there. His office had two windows now, it being several times the size of his previous one. It was large enough to host more than one guest or two at a time, which was good, because the unexpected fourth person in the room with him would have overstuffed his old quarters. He picked up a pen and pulled a pad of paper towards him, so nobody could see the exact nature of the notes he was going to take. He’d noticed this past weekend that he was running low on a few staple items in his pantry. He wanted no repeats of the deplorable situation he’d found himself in several times during the war - too distracted to remember to stock up and by the time he realized his food had finally run out, too tired to leave the house in favor of a restaurant. And I finally have to get that mirror replaced, he remembered, tapping his chin with his pen before noting that down as well. He’d cracked it while moving a piece of furniture after he’d taken up permanent residence in their family’s Berun home. He’d been recently promoted to major then, and it had happened the day before he’d been due to make his first rounds through the training schools to review candidates for placement. The annoyance of getting someone to come in to customize and install a mirror of that size so that it matched the one hanging across from it had seemed too much back then, and from there he’d grown used to it. Everything had been fine up until this morning, when it had finally given out and he’d awoken to pieces of glass scattered on the floor. It hardly needed to be said, but allowing his mind to become preoccupied by dinner plans or home renovations while in the middle of a meeting wasn’t a habitual mannerism. In this instance, though, most of the concepts being tossed about the room were over his head. He was in a rare moment of having absolutely nothing to contribute. Rudolf Fischer, a close friend of his least favorite cousin, whom Lehrgen had only called for an introduction once his options had narrowed sufficiently, had brought along his boss to the meeting he’d agreed to schedule over Degurechaff’s foray into finance. The girl in question had flashed a face-splitting smile upon hearing that news, obviously taking it as a good sign. Lehrgen has been inclined to agree. Oskar Lang even sat on the right committee to debate matters such as the one Tanya was presenting. Given the current atmosphere of the room, he’d have to conclude that the both of them had been wrong. If Lehrgen were to hazard a guess, he’d say both employees of the Reichsbank had come by for no other reason than to shout at the Imperial Army for getting above itself after it had so recently been put in its place. The members of each institution were equally patriotic, in their own ways, and that was what put them at odds. Even prior to the war, certain people within the bank had thought the amount of spending the Army did was positively ruinous. For its part, the Army wasn’t used to having to justify its expenditures anywhere but internally. None of the high-ranking officers had taken that new imposition gracefully. For the preceding half-hour, Degurechaff had done almost nothing but get yelled at. Finally, in the last few minutes she’d decided it was time to argue back. She was easily a match for both men when it came to theory, though certain specific details did appear to trouble her. "Mortgaging government assets to a foreign government is preposterous," Fischer practically shouted, pointing angrily at the document in front of him. Though Lehrgen trusted that Degurechaff was smart enough to see the risks and had determined they were worth it, he had to say he agreed with the bankers in this instance. He no longer had his own copy of her work in front of him, that having been handed over to their surprise guest, but he’d remembered feeling suspicious of the idea when he’d read it. He was glad he hadn’t requested more than a single additional copy. It had never occurred to him that she’d be preparing it herself, or that she’d work over the Christmas holiday to do so. He could add typing to her eclectic skillset. He'd gotten several disapproving remarks over that. Not directed towards her, of course, but towards him. He'd fruitlessly tried to explain that she'd come in by choice, but it had largely fallen on deaf ears. Few people were willing to believe anyone would work on Christmas unless their tyrannical boss demanded it, and it was seen as particularly egregious because he was making a young lady sacrifice time she should be spending having fun. After a few failed attempts, he'd decided to stop arguing with his sympathetic coworkers. They didn't know her well enough to know that the only reason Degurechaff understood the word fun in a typical sense was because it was in the dictionary. "I'm not recommending we transact directly with a foreign government, and I don't believe the Federal Reserve can issue loans directly to us in any case. We would be dealing with foreign banks, not foreign governments," Degurechaff reiterated calmly, as Lehrgen turned his ear back to the debate at hand. “We already have plans to stabilize the economy,” Fischer bit back. “And without foreign assistance.” “Stabilizing and growing are two different things,” Degurechaff said with a sigh. “Internationally, nobody will trust our currency no matter how we redenominate it, not until our economy looks like it's going somewhere again. We’re an industrial economy. And one that unfortunately must import most raw materials besides coal. Until we can buy those at a fair price, we’re stuck barely subsisting.” "It's still a very unusual way of doing business," Lang grumbled, cutting in. "The best money is to be made doing unusual business," Degurechaff replied, grinning wickedly, "the Americans are greedy. They'll see that. So long as it isn't illegal, there's no issue from our side." Lehrgen kept in his own grin. If Tanya could just stick to circumventing banking regulations instead of war crimes, the next twenty years might not be anything to fear. "The American economy is strong, the banks all have other places to lend their capital, and likely at a higher rate than the Reichsbank is willing to pay," Lang responded. "Excuse me for saying it, but that's where you're wrong," Degurechaff said, shaking her head. "Their economy is so strong they have too much money on their hands. There's only so many real assets to go around. At some point it all becomes speculation. As long as at least one of their banks is smart enough to realize that, they should be interested in having a new place to make loans backed by tangible cash flows, which we are more than capable of providing as soon as we dig ourselves out of this hole." With a huff, Lang gave a single nod of agreement, though he wasn’t finished objecting. "They've got enough money tied up in Europa as it is. No reputable bank will want to take on more risk on the continent," Lang countered. "And they want to make sure that the loans they've already made don't grow any riskier," Degurechaff reasoned. "The banks are owed payments from the Republic. Our reparations payments to them aren’t enormous, but the Republic is struggling as it is. If our own economy gets worse, the Empire might halt those payments, if only temporarily. The Empire and the Republic are two of Europa’s most important economies. The Americans don't want to see either of us in distress, especially not if it means the Federation has a chance to gain more influence. Either one of our countries is liable for a revolution if things go south." Fischer opened his mouth to interrupt, but she didn't allow it. "The American banks could afford some defaults on the Republic's payments. I understand. But unless we're reading different newspapers, the banks have been disinclined to negotiate a delay or reduction in the Republic's debts. It's illogical, but they're unwilling to take a write-off. They'll double down on their risk to chase the payoff they want," she argued, pulling a few clippings from various papers out of a file she’d prepared. "Investors are irrationally concerned over losses. It makes them short-sighted. When everybody’s making so many profits they can’t figure out how to spend them, no company wants to be the one taking a loss. They'd rather gamble everything and hope for a win than quit while they still can, knowing they'll lose what they've already put in," she finished. “And if that were the case, then why would they not simply renew their loans to the Republic as they come due?” Fischer asked, raising an eyebrow smugly like he’d caught Degurechaff in a logical trap. “They may be willing to take on more risk, but I’m sure they’d like to diversify it,” she replied, arms making as though she was going to cross them before they were pinned tightly behind her back, the white knuckles on one hand holding the other wrist the only evidence of her annoyance. “Even with the territorial losses, our economy has more potential than any other in Europa. We have a manufacturing base that nobody can compete with. Once things are running smoothly again, we’re less of a risk than the Republic is.” Lang and Fischer glanced between themselves and some of the tension drained from the room, both of their attitudes growing more conciliatory. “Running smoothly will require more money than this,” Lang said, pointing at the figures listed in an appendix. “True,” Degurechaff said, noticing the change and backing down herself. “It’s not that I don’t share your concerns about using foreign money, I simply take a different position on its necessity. But, as stated within the paper, we should limit ourselves in how many loans we’re willing to take out. Once our businesses can work in the international market again, we should aim for steady growth, not a windfall.” “Once the economy is in better shape we could take loans from elsewhere,” Fischer reasoned. “The Commonwealth and the Republic will be affected by anything that happens in the States,” Degurechaff contradicted. “We could loan money from another nation, but there’s hardly any point. The pound, the dollar, and the franc are what’s accepted internationally. Holding excess reserves of the ruble or the yuan or the bolivar isn’t going to get us very far.” “The lady has a point,” Lang conceded, with a small quirk of the lips. “Or she would, if we saw a financial crisis looming in the States.” "I mean no insult," the lady in question, if you could call her that, replied, with the fakest smile Lehrgen had ever seen plastered on her face, "but if we could accurately predict financial crises, we wouldn't have them. All I'm asking is that my proposal be considered seriously. If the Reichsbank finds it useful, there's no harm in floating it with a few of the big American institutions. If they aren't interested, they aren't interested." Fischer gave a good-natured sigh of defeat and looked at Lang, who nodded. "We'll submit this to the appropriate committee," he promised. "It will be nice to have a new idea to argue over, at the very least." Degurechaff's smile was real this time as she shook both of their hands. She turned back to Lehrgen after the door was shut and they were alone. “For a minute there I thought I’d started world war three,” she chuckled, shaking her head. Three?! Lehrgen thought with consternation. Not that he hadn’t had some malicious predictions about her intentions over involving their country in a second war, but that she thought it was so likely to come to pass that she was already past thinking about it and was hoping for a third was a level of ambition he hadn’t realized that even Degurechaff might possess. “I’ll hope that never happens,” he sighed, with a shake of his head, revising a thought he’d had earlier. The next twenty years would absolutely be difficult for him. xXx Oskar Lang, a concerned citizen of the North Germanian Empire but economist first, waved down a taxi as he tried to pull his coat tighter against the chill of the night. He might have to cut back on those holidays abroad soon, the ones that included more and better food than you could purchase in the Empire at the moment. That, or ask the tailor to adjust his favorite piece of winter wear. Again. “Where to, sir?” the driver asked him. Lang glanced down at his watch. Too late to go back to the office. None of the girls would be there at this hour. With a grunt of displeasure, he gave his home address. First thing the next morning, he found the smartest of the lot, who could actually incorporate commentary into a document without making it sound like one of Lang’s grandchildren had typed it. “Here,” he said, presenting the bright young thing with the trove of academic papers he’d taken off that general who probably couldn’t tell you the difference between forward and futures contracts. That clerk of his would do well at a bank, but anyone who hired her would have to fear she’d replace them within a matter of years. Not the type of person he’d want to take on. Passed over in favor of your own subordinate, and a woman a quarter of his age at that. “Add the notes I took into the appropriate places,” he instructed. “Make it sound readable. And redo the cover page, put myself as the preparer with Fischer as a contributor.” He’d thought about making some adjustments to the overly-rosy predictions in the charts, but had decided against that particular change. Too much honesty was never useful to anyone. For that same reason, putting down the name of some soldier-turned-office girl would be unwise, even if he’d like to share the credit. It would get neither of them anything but laughed out of the room. “Very good, sir,” his favorite typist smiled, already beginning to flip through the pages to see where she’d need to do the most work. “I expect it back on my desk tomorrow morning,” he replied. “And twenty copies by the end of the week.” Once those were in his hands, it would be time to sit in on another of those horrid committee meetings he’d been attending every day since he’d stepped foot into the bank. The debates themselves weren’t horrid. Indeed, they were quite edifying. What was horrid was that the debates never launched off of any novel ideas of his own. He was a man who preferred to consider fully before acting. With a crisis in the works, having a novel idea was more important than a perfect one. At long last, he’d finally be getting to take the floor. 




 

 My Brilliant Friend






 
 "An idea that is not dangerous is unworthy of being called an idea at all."
 
 February 7, 1930Lichterfelde, Imperial Capital Berun
 To your positions. Return fire. Hold them here. The sound of a gunshot slicing cleanly through cold night air triggered an automatic response. He hadn’t been one of the unlucky ones huddled for week on miserable week listening to the near-constant rap of magazines emptying, but it had been enough. Enough that shouting orders in the face of gunfire had become almost instinctive. You’re at home, Erich von Lehrgen told himself a third time, registering the familiar seams and dips of the cushions under him. They were reassuringly concrete, a distinct blend of plush padding and rigid piping no dream could emulate. He took a deep breath in and held it until it forced his heartbeat to slow. It was just an engine backfiring, he decided, when there was no further noise besides that of a car trundling along as it turned right onto the main street, heading towards central Berun. Still half in a doze, he picked up his book from where it lay fallen on the floor. Eyes squinting against lamplight as they adjusted to wakefulness with the same lack of enthusiasm as the rest of his body, he thumbed back to the last thing he remembered reading, smoothing out corners crinkled from a haphazard landing as he went. While he found the page he reached lazily towards the table on his right in search of the old postcard he’d long ago repurposed as a bookmark, then turned his head when he didn’t feel it under his hand. A glance was enough to tell him it wasn’t anywhere on the table, which briefly made rolling sideways off the couch and onto the floor an attractive option. A way to look below the furniture that involved the minimum level of disruption to his present circumstances underneath a blanket. An indulgence in lethargy, an homage to the end of the week and to the late hour. His memory would be the only witness. It was precisely that which made him toss off the protective layer to kneel down and find the truant card in a manner he told himself was more dignified. His own good judgement underpinned rather important decisions these days. He fished the postcard out from beneath the sofa. With a shake of his wrist to remove the light coating of dust - he wouldn’t fault the maid for not moving the furniture to clean every single week - he went to return the bookmark to its rightful place. He paused before it got there and gave it a read. It was something seen so often it was never looked at, a piece of his daily life for so many years he’d forgotten what was written on it. It was the first communication he’d received when he’d been posted up in Londinium. More than ten years ago now, nothing more than a hello from home where everyone had written a few words and put their signature down. Lehrgen gave a smile at the memory and put the card back into its rightful place a quarter of the way through The Sound and the Fury. Oddly appropriate, given the situation, that the postcard was stuck inside a book written in Albish. The wrong country, the language originated in the Commonwealth and Folkner was from the States so far as he knew, but nonetheless, that posting was the reason he knew the language well enough to have bought the untranslated version. He put a hand to the table to help him stand and looked towards the clock. It was just far enough away that he had a hard time making out the position of the hands in the dim light. He picked up his glasses, which he’d removed when he’d lain down to read, and for good measure picked up the nearly empty wine glass next to them and polished off the remainder of its contents. Yet another exhilarating Friday night, he chuckled to himself, taking the now empty glass to the kitchen so it could be filled with enough water to prevent any red residue from sticking to the bottom. He still had a scar on his hand from the first time he’d tried to scrub a stubborn stain off and broke the glass when he gripped too hard. He’d been more careful ever since. He’d also bought cheaper but sturdier wine glasses for day-to-day use. On any other night, he would have washed it then and there, a self-enforced clean-sink policy in effect, but he was too tired. Asleep on the couch before eleven, his thoughts continued, accompanied by a self-pitying shake of his head. Already, he’d become exactly the person he’d sworn to his friends he wouldn’t when his job had grown into academic work that followed him home whenever he let it. With great satisfaction he exchanged his kitchen sink for his bathroom sink, and began the process of getting ready for bed. At this point, he was far more interested in embracing whatever dull routine he’d fallen into than he was in discovering what went on in Berun past midnight. With somewhat less satisfaction, he shivered as ice-cold water splashed his face, the task unpleasant enough that it was more of a quick wipe than a proper rinse. A swish of mouthwash that left an antiseptic sting in its wake and he was ready to give sleep another try, this time in a real bed. Not his own. Not tonight. He was in no mood to be awoken again in such an unpleasant fashion, and his room faced the street. He’d opened the door to the one bedroom that faced the back corner of his lot, the one that had no views over either street or alley. He cracked open a window to let fresh night air in so that it might clear out the strange and peculiar scent that even the cleanest room carried after being shut up too long. It didn’t bother him half so much as the strange and peculiar dreams he’d been having recently, but there existed no fix so similarly easy to clear those out of his head. He doubted if there was a single soldier who’d come through the war without a nightmare or two following in the months afterwards. Even those who hadn’t spent a moment of their time on the front would have to contend with imaginations where a failure to execute their duties properly led to some critical mistake or other that doomed them all. Well, maybe there’s one soldier, he conceded, a cruel smile on a child’s face popping into his head. But only one. You had to be afraid of something to have nightmares over it, and fear did not come easily to her. To him either, with the exception of the past few weeks. He could bear hardship as well as the next man. Had grown up believing war a necessary part of life for any nation, that it was a good challenge, even, a test to prove the character of state and soldier alike. It was when a nation’s life became nothing but that his certainty his work was worthwhile failed him. He’d tried not to think too hard on it at the time, but ever since he’d heard Degurechaff drop a mention of a third world war so nonchalantly the phrase crept its way into his mind each time it began to wander. His sleep since had been at best fitful, scenes out of some bleak sci-fi novel conjured into being behind his eyelids each time they closed. There was no helping it. He’d never sleep a night through again if he didn’t at least try to prevent her dark vision of the future from coming true. He allowed himself another moment in bed and a single groan of malcontent muffled by the nearest pillow before he heaved himself upwards and flicked the light back on. There would be a day, one day, when work didn’t encroach on his last refuge from it. Probably. He had to hope so. Quietly, he retrieved his robe and padded down the stairs, wincing when one of them creaked under his weight, the sound echoing loudly through an otherwise empty home. It felt somehow disrespectful to disturb the silence, like the house belonged to itself after a certain hour and he was infringing on their arrangement. He took his seat at his desk, and seeing as it was a Friday night and he’d already broken one household rule, he leaned back in his chair and kicked his feet up, lacing his fingers over his head and closing his eyes to think. It was so pointless as to almost toe the line of the absurd, to sit in the cold and the dark stressing over some improbable future that he might not even live long enough to see. Especially not when he had a more immediate problem he was expected to recommend an answer for in a little over a week’s time. By the end of spring, they’d run up against a major deadline for disarmament. To ask them to destroy the work of the countless man-hours needed to build the weapons that had made them Europa’s single greatest power would be to ask the men involved to turn a blind eye to waste. Of course, no institution as large as the Imperial Army could exist without an often elaborately byzantine bureaucracy that introduced opportunities for misspent time and funds. That didn’t mean anybody made a career in the military expecting it to be a ready source of illicit personal enrichment. On the whole, the Army had run a tighter ship than the Navy, so to speak. To officers baptized in a culture of prudence, waste and excess on the level they were talking would be something of a cardinal sin. Even worse than destroying their own work was their other choice: selling it to the very same countries forcing them to disarm, and doing it below market value. And if both options were off the table, it left only one, to cling onto their weapons and do so in secret. It was in no one’s best interest to do that, not even the Empire’s own. Caught with a handful of extras they could blame human error. Caught with perhaps a quarter of what was meant for the scrap pile and they might plead paranoia and find an audience willing to believe three unannounced invasions had indelibly scarred the national psyche. Caught with the better part of their stockpiles intact and what little trust the other powers had in them would melt away, leaving them no choice but to eviscerate their beaten enemy, finish the job once and for all. Stretching slightly and tilting his head back further, he racked his brain for a solution that would satisfy their obligations without betraying his duty to what remained of his country. Outright destruction was probably for the best, at least for the larger part of it. The most he could do was to find a way to conceal a few critical items, stash them away under the pretense that they’d forgotten about that one depot. Things that could one day help provide the core of what they’d need once the Empire had won back the dignity of fully securing its own borders again. Or slow down an invasion long enough for someone else to intervene on their behalf. The trick was, Lehrgen would need to coax the better half of his leadership into committing definitively to that position instead of the endless speculating about nonexistent options they’d been doing for the past six months. As luck would have it, there was one person who he was sure would be up to the task of inventing an unassailable argument in support of shipping the majority of their machinery off to the junkyard, and she worked for him. As luck would also have it, she was the one person Lehrgen couldn’t seek an answer from. He’d have Degurechaff’s letter of resignation in hand no more than an hour after the fact. A tragic turn of events after he was finally beginning to believe his Friday evenings weren’t going to be spent locked in his office reading things and signing them until the end of eternity. Orb or no, she deserved the title of magician. Paperwork had a habit of disappearing for good in her presence. I’m on my own for this one, he thought, as he wrote out unnecessary details on the pad of paper he was holding in front of him so he at least had something on the page. A title, a date, an author. A way of pretending he’d accomplished something. If he wanted to count proving that he could pass the second grade among his list of accomplishments, that would even be true. Moments later, that same paper was a crumpled ball in the waste bin. All his life, he’d walked two steps ahead of everyone else. Always turning back to make sure they weren’t gaining on him, always afraid that if he slowed for a second they would. In childhood, he’d been awarded first place in the little world he lived in purely by luck. The older he’d grown, the more it had taken to stay near the top. He'd worked hard to be there. He began to write again. Starting from the right premise this time. He wouldn’t doom his work to inferiority from the outset. The realization that life was larger than his pocket of Imperial countryside, that there was another race being run, a special one for those singularities who could invent the inconceivable and explain the incomprehensible, hadn’t disrupted his own competition. It was separate, something he’d never be a part of, and didn’t need to be. Not to do the job in front of him, do it on his own, and do it so well there could be no question he had indeed earned his position. The key to starting a difficult task was to start with the simplest part of it. Once you were halfway up the hill, climbing the rest didn’t seem so bad. Out of all their options, one stood out as an obvious least favorite. Regardless, it had to be given equal treatment, proposed and weighed and then refuted. That wouldn’t be much of a challenge. Someone could practically argue the case against selling arms to countries that bordered them without being literate. But if they didn’t share a border? Lehrgen thought, bringing his feet back to the floor with a soft thud and straightening up as an idea struck him. It was no secret to anyone who read The Times that half of Londinium thought the terms of the agreement too favorable to Republican and Federation interests. The Commonwealth’s mistake had been coming to the table with something reasonable. Had they opened demanding terms nobody would agree to - punitive sanctions on nations that had kicked off the war, say - a place resembling the middle ground might have been reached. As it was, every compromise the Commonwealth had made only tipped the balance towards an unsustainable system. It wasn’t outside the realm of possibility to imagine that neither the Commonwealth nor the Unified States would raise alarm bells if the final destination of certain weaponry was elsewhere than originally intended, provided that destination was sufficiently far away. Provided also that it wasn’t used to arm territory that either country thought part of its own sphere, formally or informally. For as long as Lehrgen could remember, the Akitsushima Dominion had had ambitions beyond their islands. A willing buyer for what the Empire was looking to sell if there ever was one. Hell, the Anglo countries might even be pleased to hear the Federation would face a credible threat out of the east. Plus, it was a chance to curry favor with a country that had no worse than a neutral opinion on the Empire. Perhaps even the basis of a future anti-Federation alliance. Convincing Degurechaff to assist in that sort of venture wouldn’t be terribly difficult, or at least he didn’t think. A healthy influx of cash, weapons sent somewhere they wouldn’t be a danger to anyone, and if it came down to it, he’d tell her they were trading goods that would be obsolete by the time they were used again for the money to build new ones. It would be half-true on both counts. Ten or more years into the future and what arms they had now would begin rapidly depreciating in usefulness. And if the Empire was restricted on the quantity of its possessions, they had little choice but to pour their resources into quality. Lehrgen rubbed the juncture of shoulder and neck with his spare hand, some tension melting away at the thought of their overabundant armaments sailing away far beyond the reach of Degurechaff or anyone with a like mind. Whatever plans she had for a second world war would be delayed by five years or more if he could guarantee they had to rebuild their inventories up from more reasonable levels. From there, she could see about a third. A few quick notes were all he needed to make, only enough to serve as a reminder for guiding his thoughts when he headed into the office the next morning. Midnight epiphanies had a habit of disappearing if they weren’t recorded. Once he’d done that, he made his way back upstairs, stopping to fix a tilted picture-frame along the way, walking this time with purpose instead of trying to slink around his own home like an intruder. By the time Monday morning rolled around, two nights in a row of untroubled sleep had almost buoyed what was fast becoming a perpetually dour mood enough that he flirted with the idea of dropping by to see Tanya. She never came seeking assistance or begging for more time to finish a project, so if he didn’t go to her, he’d have to wait until promptly one o’clock on Tuesday. An eagerness encouraged him to wander out of his office and down the hall, an anticipation. Always two steps ahead, until one day he’d chanced to glance forward and caught sight of someone rounding the bend far up ahead. Having her report to him was like having a tether that let him keep pace with her. But until she had time to rethink her own plans, for that brief, temporary, fleeting moment, he’d be two steps in front again. It was only the sense that an off-schedule sighting would be a bad omen, an unpropitious start to his week that would poison claiming an early victory, that stopped him before he got carried away and made him wait the intervening day and a half. As had become their habit, Degurechaff seated herself at the round table in one corner of his office. Lehrgen rose from his desk to join her. Sitting across from each other had fallen out of fashion as soon as they realized how much time they were wasting passing paper back and forth. Her work always came presented in an orderly fashion. A different folder for each project, a cover sheet on every one with the current status, the highest priority items on the top of the stack. She placed the pile down between them and pulled absently at her shirt to straighten it, the motion something of a routine, like brushing invisible specks of dust off. Lehrgen let the meeting run as usual, flipping through current work first. On a typical day, that left anywhere from fifteen minutes to an hour free, time to cover anything outside the original agenda. Once or twice they’d cut their time short. Most days they filled the two hours completely. A new assignment, some quibble of Tanya’s about the way things were done, an analysis of whatever topic had graced the headlines that day, however it happened, the time got away from them. The end of their meetings had as much of a pattern as the beginning, his adjutant knocking at the door to announce his next appointment, Tanya saying she’d let him get back to real work or some variation thereof. When each folder in their current stack had been opened, reviewed, and returned to the pile, she glanced up at him. Outside of three occasions when she’d had something on her mind that couldn’t wait, she gave a slight pause to allow him the space to speak first, a subdued sort of respectfulness that would make it impossible to guess that she excelled at brazenly making up her own orders and shouting them across a battlefield. “I had a thought over the weekend,” Lehrgen said, using his thumb to push the cap of his pen off and back on a few times while he watched Degurechaff’s face to see if she’d have any sort of reaction to an original thought that didn’t come from her own mouth. She clasped her hands on the table in front of her and leaned forward slightly, head tilting minutely as she waited for him to continue. “You know the disarmament deadline is coming up?” She gave a single, curt nod. “Neither of our options is good.” “I was starting to get the sense that concealment was the favored position.” “It’s not. Or at least it shouldn’t be. You said it yourself a month ago. The worst move would be to force a conflict too soon." She inhaled slowly, letting the breath out with the same control. It had been a bit low to use her own words against her. Combined with whatever disappointment his firm denial caused and it was no secret why she needed to reign in her reaction. "It’s better if we invest in new and better weaponry, even if there is less of it," he said hesitantly, an attempt at a peace offering. “And your thoughts on what we do with the rest, sir?” she asked after a moment of silence. “We could sell them elsewhere. Somewhere they couldn’t be used against us, to a buyer willing to pay a fair price.” He took a few sheets of paper from his own folio and slid them towards her. A list was all it was, what they had, what they had to get rid of, what items would be in highest demand, price estimates for each. A list so long that tabulating it had been instructive. Lampooning Republican journalists for their artistic license when it came to hyperbole was a favorite pastime for any Imperial citizen. In this case, Lehrgen didn’t think he could criticize them in good conscience anymore. “And how do you suppose we slip a shipment of that size, going that distance, under everyone’s nose?” “We don’t,” Lehrgen replied. “Globally, shipping is more or less controlled by the Commonwealth and the States. There’s no love lost there, but they don’t take such a hard line as our immediate neighbors. And if we assume the Commonwealth doesn’t want to give another Europaen state the chance to accrue power, they may let us pass weapons through without putting the word out. It’s at least worth asking.” “That might be true,” Degurechaff nodded. “I’m not sure how closely you follow politics on the other side of the world, but the Akitsushima Dominion has a healthy appetite for expansionism.” “I’m well aware,” she said, with a roll of her eyes and a shake of her head. “But…” “But?” he asked, disappointment that she’d already found an objection beginning to sink in. He kicked himself a moment later for thinking her reaction would be any different. She wouldn’t be herself if she let veritable mountains of weapons slip away without a fight. “Just…” she drifted off, closing her eyes and drumming two fingers against her forehead a few times. “Just let me think for a second if you would, sir.” “By all means,” he replied, smiling at the gesture. If only she knew how many times she’d caused a passingly similar reaction in him, those times he didn’t have a ready response formed without a few moments taken to process the implications of what she’d said. It would be better to get her complaints dealt with and out of the way than to try to force her to work on a project whose aim she fundamentally disagreed with. “It’s not a bad idea,” she said slowly after a minute. “A very good one, in fact. I should have thought of it myself. I admit I may have been too convinced we were going to try to stash the weapons away to imagine another fate for them. I hadn’t heard any movement one way or the other on getting rid of them.” Lehrgen dipped his head in acknowledgement, wondering if she’d ever said that particular phrase to anyone before, I should have thought of it myself. He’d try to forget about the part where she’d mentioned it had never entered her mind that the Imperial Army would actually make an attempt to comply with its obligations. “If you’re thinking the east is the best bet, what would you say to selling to the Middle Kingdom instead?” she continued. That was not the objection I was expecting, Lehrgen thought with confusion, giving a shrug and spreading his palms, very willing to be convinced. It mattered little to him one way or the other. He’d made his choice based on nothing more than which nation he assumed would be willing to pay a better price. If she wasn’t going to fight him on the main objective, he wasn’t going to fight her on the details. “If we sell arms to the Dominion, there’s a chance those same weapons will show up on the Federation’s eastern border within a few years. The Akitsushimans could decide it’s time for a second round whenever they choose. The Federation would have to know those came from us. It would give up the ruse too soon. In the immediate future, the Middle Kingdom will only use them internally. Word might leak out about the odd piece of Imperial equipment, but that could just as well be something one of our enemies captured during the war and sold.” “True,” Lehrgen conceded. “The less notice the better. Though it is disappointing nothing will be used against the Federation. I expected you’d share that particular sentiment.” “I do,” Tanya said, with a smirking sort of smile. “I wouldn’t be agreeing to this so easily if I didn’t think it would cause problems for them one day. The Middle Kingdom shares a far longer border with them. If we help their civil war resolve favorably for the government in power and they unite the country under their rule, they’ll be force to reckon with. But there will be enough years in between to soften our neighbors up so they won’t react so badly when they find out.” Ahh, Lehrgen thought, satisfied that he’d figured out the reason why she was so willing to play along with his plan when it ran counter to hers. With a slight alteration, sell to this country instead of that, she’d already found a way to maneuver their greatest threat into facing the possibility of a two-front war. Not bad, exactly, but dangerous if it came too soon. “That civil war hardly deserves the name,” Lehrgen said, waving his hand. Now he had a motive to stick with the Dominion as the buyer. "Plenty of countries have put down communist uprisings. We even had temporary socialist republics declared within our own borders.” She inhaled audibly and then bit her lip, like she had something to say but wasn’t sure she should. Going into it, back when he’d hired her, he’d expected she’d give her unfiltered opinion no matter if he wanted it or not. She’d respected hierarchy to the degree that she had never directly disobeyed orders, but after all the times she’d unblinkingly given statements counter to all orthodoxy, it was with an increasing amount of shock that Lehrgen had begun to realize she often hesitated in bluntly disagreeing with him. The only reason he could come up with for the change was that in the Army she’d had no fear of getting outright fired. For now, she was employed largely based on his whim. "You know Degurechaff," he started, wanting to break her of this before it formed into habit and made it even more impossible to trust what she was saying, "you are allowed to debate me. You aren't going to be shown the door because we have different opinions on a complicated issue. I expect you to do the work I ask of you and for you not to do anything that runs counter to the Army’s current philosophy, but when it comes to a conversation like this, feel free to consider it one between equals." "Well, in that case..." she began, glancing at him another time for confirmation. He nodded. "You're oversimplifying things. I think the potential is there for a real revolution. Same as the Federation, the Kingdom modernized late and still has a huge underclass of peasant farmers who are little more than serfs, the country's too big to control easily. Even if they were losing, the rebels could retreat somewhere it would be hard to get to them and keep the fight going," she said, ticking off her reasons on her fingers. "And no matter how long the odds are, if they win, that's a communist country that’s not only large but populous. They could be a greater threat than the Federation one day. Not directly, maybe, but in other ways. If we were to arm the legal government of the Middle Kingdom, though, help them deal swiftly and heavy-handedly with the rebellion, we eliminate that risk.” “Fair enough,” Lehrgen replied. In all this, he’d forgotten to consider the unlikely alternative where the Qin communists actually won. That did change the math. “We’ll approach the Middle Kingdom first. Now, the reason I really wanted to speak to you is to see if we could come up with a way to put a veneer of legality on the whole operation. It might make it easier for the Commonwealth to excuse the transgression if technically it isn’t one.” “I assume you have a copy of the treaty in here?” she asked. With a nod he stood and walked towards an overstuffed bookshelf. After a brief struggle to create enough space to pull them out without ripping, he returned with a copy for each of them. “The part we’ll want is about forty pages in,” he told her, so familiar with the document that he could swear he had certain passages memorized. She nodded and flipped to it, then let out a whoosh of breath after a few minutes. “Well?” “Well, the terms of sale are stated fairly clearly,” she told him with a wry laugh. “And you don’t think you’re smarter than whoever wrote that thing?” “Do you?” “You wouldn’t be here if I didn’t.” Her eyes flickered off the page to look at him only for a second, annoyance and appreciation in equal measure notable before they fell back to the document. “I guess we’ll see,” she hummed. “I don’t suppose anyone would be willing to broker the sale?” she asked after a few minutes spent paging silently back and forth. “Dacia, maybe,” Lehrgen sighed. “Their defeat was so quick they didn’t have time to hate us as much as the rest. But they’ll know they’re the only real option. They’ll charge accordingly. Probably with a yearly fee on top of it to keep their mouths shut.” She clicked her tongue and dropped her eyes back to the pages in front of her to look for answers once again. “We can’t sell it to the Middle Kingdom. There’s no way around that,” she murmured another couple minutes later, eyes still transfixed on the words in front of her. “But there’s nothing saying it can’t be disposed of another way. It could be gifted. In return the buyer could purchase some property in the city at an inflated value to cover the cost. Or it could be leased.” “Leased into perpetuity sounds simplest to arrange.” “It’s not real estate,” she said, looking up. “It’s a depreciating asset. No, we should make the term as short as possible. If the Kingdom’s in the middle of dealing with their communist problem we can negotiate even better terms when it comes up for renewal.” "And how do we guarantee they honor that instead of just keeping it? It’ll be halfway across the world by then, we can’t retrieve it and the countries that could aren’t going to lift a finger to help us." "We'll negotiate a sale price as well, have them put the full value aside in a Waldstätten bank account that's got a neutral trustee, if they don't play fair, we don't return the money. I'll draw up a preliminary document for the financial arrangement. We should make sure we’re allowed to use the principal in the interim. We could put it to good use,” she explained, waving her hand like it was nothing more than a triviality. Lehrgen had the feeling he was soon going to see another paper full of financial terms that made him feel vaguely helpless. If he had time to put his mind to the subject he was sure he could come to a solid understanding, but for now he’d have to stick with smiling and nodding along complacently like he knew what she was talking about. “Good,” he replied. “Very good, thank you. You think you could have something to give me by the time I have my meeting next week? If you have to push the deadline back on a few other items, don’t worry about it.” “Not a problem,” she said, getting up and then immediately plopping back down into her chair, shaking her finger like she’d just had another idea and wanted him to wait before he got up himself. "While we're at it, we should see if the Kingdom is interested in a loan of some of our other resources." His brow furrowed for a moment, wondering what she could mean by that, before coming to the unfortunate conclusion that she was still using that word to refer to human beings. "Am I to assume that by resources, you mean people?" he corrected. "Yes," she said, smiling as though she was pleased that he'd understood her intentions. He didn't think his own point had made it through to her. "It would be both noticeable and alarming to the rest of the world if part of our Army were to show up in the east. They don't exactly have many natural blondes over there. Plus, we have our hands full as it is.” "We aren't going to send a single member of our Army," she said patiently, shaking her head like she was a teacher lecturing a particularly thick student. "Private citizens, working for a private company, will, of their own volition, be contracted to work in a foreign country." "We're going to send a mercenary army," he clarified, disapproval seeping into his tone. “You know as well as I do that’ll cause nothing but trouble with-” "General," she chided, interrupting him with an innocent smile on her face that belied her sarcastic tone, "we aren't living in the Medieval era anymore. Our country is home to many capable men and women who are going to make the wise decision to seek employment from a company headquartered in Waldstätte that provides privately-arranged security services." “And how is that any different?” She pulled a blank piece of paper out of the back of one of her folders. “Pen?” she asked. “Mine’s out of ink.” Silently, he handed his over, and a moment later she was drawing boxes. He was in for another thought experiment on circumventing inconvenient legalities if that was anything to go by. “You just need to put enough distance in between everything. A large company in Waldstätte owns a group of smaller companies, one of which will be hired by a Qin company that offers security for local businesses. With the political instability, it would be no surprise if the demand for their services outstripped the supply of competent local hires, and perhaps they use another company to scout for them,” she said, labeling each box with a purpose as she pointed at them. “If some of the employees they bring in from abroad end up assisting the Middle Kingdom’s army, there’s too many layers in between to have any reasonable expectation that our government could or would trace exactly how our citizens are earning their incomes.” “Do any of these businesses actually exist as of right now? Or is the Army going to need to learn how to play entrepreneur?” “Ideally, we’ll make use of existing entities. A bit strange if everything’s chartered on the same day. And most of them will be no more than fronts, at best a handful of people processing paperwork.” Lehrgen took a deep breath and looked at the page again. He could see how it would work, how they could claim to have overlooked that their citizens were fighting under a foreign flag. It would make them some money. Alleviate some unemployment. Nonetheless, it all rubbed him the wrong way. They were supposed to be reconstructing their country, not embroiling its people in further conflicts. There was too much of her in the idea for his liking, too much unswerving devotion to keeping the fight going somewhere, somehow. “Look, Degurechaff,” he sighed, the dreadful thought that she might apply for a new job with one of these companies once it was all set up crossing his mind with a shudder, “I appreciate the ingenuity. But I’m not sure it's the right...direction. Not for now, at least. We just got done with a war.” “Did we?” she laughed. “Sometimes it’s hard to tell when each political party has their own group of hired muscle. Honestly, I’m half-inclined to suggest we plant someone in the KPD to feed this idea to them too. With any luck, they’ll send some of their men overseas. If they’re going to fight anyway, isn’t it better they’re doing it over there?” Lehrgen resisted the urge to sigh again. Always. Always her arguments were so much more convincing that his own, said aloud or repeated in his own head. Pro and anti-Communist groups fighting in the streets of his city, or a city half a world away? It couldn’t even be called a choice. He leaned back so she wouldn’t see the note he scrawled - that if they went through with this, one of the hiring requirements for any so-called security guards would be a clean service record - and then folded it to slip in a pocket. “Well, I’ll speak to someone who knows more than I do about legal dealings in other countries,” he conceded, hoping someone else would reject this plan for him in a way that Degurechaff couldn’t worm her way around. “Ah, right,” she commented, leaning forward so far she would need to stand to get closer, “you were acquainted with someone in the field, no? If it’s someone you know, I could come along if you wouldn’t mind. The more I understand about the specifics, the easier it will be next time we need to get something done.” The next time you want to skirt the law, you mean, Lehrgen thought, preventing a groan of exasperation from leaving his throat. Don’t include me so casually in your plans for world domination. “Oh, umm,” he hesitated, remembering her earlier fixation on the topic and casting about for a reason that he might be unwilling to introduce her, and then giving a mental apology to his friend once he found one, “he, ahh...he died.” “What?” “Losing the war was too much for him, I guess. Heart gave out when the news was announced.” “How awful,” Tanya muttered glumly. What the hell is it with you? Lehrgen questioned silently to the person across from him. She’d seen hundreds of people killed in front of her, if not thousands. Lost men under her own command, seen the reports of tens and then hundreds of thousands killed, had never batted an eye. And yet the death of some random civil servant, one who wasn’t actually dead to begin with, was one she looked to be taking personally. She looked so suddenly like a teenager battling her first bout of disillusionment with life that he almost reached out to pat her hand and give her some words of comfort. If all she wanted was some nefarious legal advice, there were a number of politicians who might know a thing or two about which laws were ripe for twisting. This one judge hadn’t been her only hope. When he caught himself, it was only Degurechaff’s presence in the room that kept him from trying to literally knock some sense back into his head. It may have been pure conceit to think he had any chance of keeping up with her. Trying to get ahead of her had only given her the opportunity to use that tether he’d imagined was helping him to slingshot herself forward again. At the rate this was going, he would be the one hopping the fence over to her side and not the other way around. “I’ll find someone appropriate to take this matter to,” he told her at the same time that he began wondering how much he’d have to pay her to return to her nunnery and manage their finances, or something else equally out-of-the-way, nodding at her pointedly to dismiss her. “See you Thursday,” she said, ducking her head deferentially and seeing herself out. Once he was sure she was a safe distance down the hall, he got up, closed his door, and leaned against it for a moment, knocking the back of his head against it a few times and giving a sigh of frustration. One day, he promised himself. One day, I’ll figure out how to make it so I don’t have to worry about what she’ll do to this world. xXx One day, Tanya Degurechaff told herself, putting her back to her office door while she sighed with relief and let her shoulders sag down. One day, I won’t have to worry this world will find a way to screw me over. Honestly, it was like her boss wanted to hand the Empire a chance to go down the wrong path on a silver platter. Next thing she knew, she’d find him down in Ildoa hoping to make good on that alliance. Adults shouldn’t need babysitters. Tanya kicked a heel out, pushed her shoulders into the back of the door, and levered herself upright. She had work to do. Relaxing on the job wasn’t helping anyone, least of all her. Before she complained about her working conditions, she should try to change them. Not her daily working conditions. Those were fine. Her metaphysical working conditions, on the other hand, only got a C. Competent people in positions of power were supposed to make her life less complicated, not more. If that was the world she had to live in, so be it. She had no exalted family name, nowhere close to enough money to buy influence, and her days of threatening anyone into compliance had ended when her orbs had been confiscated. That meant on the basis of merit alone, one of the Army’s rising stars respected her opinion enough to call her an equal. She could work with that. Smart, connected, ambitious, if that didn’t say opportunity then nothing did. More than averting both a personal and country-wide financial disaster like she’d originally hoped, with someone like that on her side, she could avert a whole lot of other problems. Or at least give her an inside source to finally put her two steps ahead of the game. Constantly trying to stay afloat got old fast. Ahh, I forgot to give Lehrgen his pen back, she realized, in the middle of putting her things away. He kept a busy schedule, so it would be better not to interrupt. She’d return it Thursday. In the meantime, he had others, and she could write with an expensive model for a change. The product of such fine craftsmanship deserved to be put to use. On the back of an old page of notes, she wrote her name a few times. Like normal first, then an attempt at script. The result of that was dissatisfying. It looked nothing like the elegant, looping T. Degurechaff she saw on missives that came down the hall. She couldn’t blame a faulty pen for her handwriting anymore. She gave up on that and tried something she’d be better at - writing in another alphabet. Considering how infrequently she practiced, she was pleased with how neatly it came out. There was still something weird about reading her own name in katakana, though. Time to get rid of the evidence, she told herself. A minor pyrotechnic spell was possible without an orb, but controlling it wasn’t. A burnt hand would be a serious impediment to the work she’d promised to do, so she tore the paper in front of her into a few pieces instead. It wasn’t like she was going to show it to the Akitsushiman ambassador. She’d felt a residual twinge of guilt directing aid away from them, but nostalgia was no excuse for suboptimal decision-making. If the Akitsushimans wanted to pick a fight with the Americans one day, they were on their own. Lending a hand with political suppression in the Middle Kingdom was a much safer and more lucrative venture. Any modern tech company could tell you that. Better yet, if there was any chance that sending weapons to the anti-Communist cause would stop them before they got to the Long March, she’d seriously have to consider submitting herself for the Nobell Peace Prize. She’d even done it while simultaneously making a plan to move the more aggressive citizens of the Empire to the other side of the world. This was one time she deserved to be called a genius. Regrettably, she’d probably be remembered in Japan for letting no amount of crying, yelling, or begging dissuade her from firing the people that deserved it. Nobody but her old bosses would know that what she’d really excelled in was the subtler art of reassigning underperforming employees to roles that fit their strengths better. Or if that wasn’t an option, sticking them somewhere they couldn’t do much damage until they realized it was time to quit. Of course, in a world without transaction costs, immediate termination of non-ideal staff would have been her go-to option. As if Being X would send her to that type of fantasy world. Between interviews, background checks, training costs, lawsuits and public image, dismissal was always a last resort for any self-respecting corporate entity. The mark of a true human resources professional was the ability to work with the employees they were saddled with. The same went for citizens of her country. The sad fact of it was that a worrying percentage of the Empire’s population was addicted to violence to the degree that the absence of job openings in the official Army reduced them to forming up into militias and fighting amongst themselves instead of seeking gainful employment. It was no wonder the country had ended up in a second world war if that type of behavior was left unpunished. If she had the power to revoke their citizenship and replace them with rational, peace-loving individuals like herself, their papers would be invalidated faster than she could bid them Auf Nimmerwiedersehen. Barring that, the next best option was to find a way to use them productively. There was a perfect job out there for everyone, if they were willing to look hard enough. Anyone who felt their true calling was to be a war maniac could be her guest in applying their passions to liberating the Qin people from the People’s Liberation Army. General von Lehrgen hadn’t been what she’d call enthusiastic about that idea. He’d probably joined the Army to bring glory to the Empire or whatever. Former professional soldiers going mercenary didn’t exactly sound like something that could be termed "glorious". He could call the job whatever he liked. If he was fine with the concept of a state paying some people to kill other people, she didn’t see the sense in splitting hairs over whether patriotism or profit was the motive. In the end, logic had won that argument, but the satisfaction of concluding in her favor had quickly evaporated. Her possible paths out of the Army shouldn’t die off without doing the polite thing and giving some notice. It was like Being X had sensed she was getting too close to her dream job and had snatched it away. Overall, it was a small complaint. A drop in the bucket compared to the news that she wouldn’t have to cope with the fallout from gross violation of rearmament restrictions. Lehrgen had said something cryptic about new and better, but she wasn’t going to lose any sleep over it. He hadn’t seemed very serious about it, like he knew he was lying to himself. Everyone had to have some hope for the future to make it through the day. By now, Tanya had finished pulling out the information she had on hand that could help her with her newest task. She put her pen to a clean piece of paper. Estimating how much the world’s first modern private military organization should charge would be a fun exercise in market forces. It was a shame she wouldn’t personally see any profits. If the American model was anything to go by, they were going to be raking in cash by the truckful. She’d forego that income for another potential problem crossed off her list. It was another step closer to regaining the peace of her evenings. The funny thing about living in a nightmare was that it kept them away at night. Occasionally waking up in a cold sweat was an unexpected downside to having something to lose besides her life. Last night she’d started in on getting sappy before she got a hold of herself. None of those adrenaline-junkies she’d called subordinates would be awake with the same problem. The only one who might commiserate was her only conscript of the lot. Frankly, she’d hope that a few nights of scarce sleep were the biggest of Visha’s problems. It was nights like that which made her want to crack open a beer. She didn’t keep them on hand, so they were never there to help lull her back to sleep. Ahh really, she lectured herself, drawing up an outline of her ideas before she began writing in earnest, I sound like a middle-aged man. Next I’ll be craving a midnight beer while I worry about the cost of school fees and wonder if my high school buddies are doing any better. She bent her head down to her work, angrily crossing out a few lines when she realized she’d put them out of order in her distraction. She paused mid-stroke and shook herself. Of course I sound like a middle-aged man, she reminded herself, resuming her work. Being a stereotype of one is what’s the problem. Exactly a week later, and she’d put the finishing touches on. It was hard not to grin smugly when General von Lehrgen gave a surprised but approving nod to the rest of her work completed on time as well. Please. Putting in some overtime with the hopes of coasting by easy twenty years down the road was the essence of the corporate work ethic. If she couldn’t do that, she should quit and go find some dead-end job instead. “Good work,” Lehrgen told her, stacking the papers after giving them a read-through. “Glad you took advantage of the office typists this time.” “Official business, sir. And if I hadn’t, this wouldn’t have been ready in time for tomorrow’s meeting,” she replied. If she was going to get written up at work, it wouldn’t be for something as trivial as inappropriate use of company resources. “I gave General von Romel a heads up that this was coming,” he said, as he stood up to leave. “He was - ahh - he was impressed.” Tanya composed herself and gave her best shot at a gracious smile. She’d been called up to his office twice since she’d been hired. So far, he’d been impervious to all discussions of the well-moneyed crowd he dealt with. All he wanted to do was kick up his heels and get teary-eyed over the past. Finally, this might herald a breakthrough with another important part of her network. “Just…” Lehrgen began, rubbing at the back of his neck, “just, if any big ideas come to you, I’d like to hear them before you get too far. There’s certain meetings I can’t take you to, so I could provide some...insight you might be missing. Romel might be too busy to explain.” “Sure thing,” she promised. If Lehrgen was stressed she was going to try to overshadow him and threaten his job, she was happy to reassure him that she had no interest. She’d only want it if she were stuck back as a soldier. At that point, she’d give him something to worry about, any former friendship notwithstanding. Business had to come first. If either of them had any luck, it wouldn’t come to that. And luck seems to be with us, Tanya reflected happily another week later when everything had been approved and sent along to their international partners. She had no luck to speak of, but her boss would be smart to get into gambling. Going an entire world war without training a gun on a single enemy soldier? If she believed in divine providence, that would be example number one. It wasn’t much more than a month later that she was running hands through her hair and staring down at what was about to become a final proposal. Other people had checked it, so the numbers weren’t only her own calculations. That was no guarantee they hadn’t fallen victim to some anchoring bias after they’d seen her initial projections. If she’d been wrong about those, it was possible she’d ruined it for everyone after her. It’s better than nothing, she told herself, handing the final revisions off with a huff. She just hoped she’d padded it enough that they’d still make money once it was negotiated down. If she’d been wildly over the mark, she’d claim innocence. The transaction was nothing if not atypical, no good comps to work off of existed. Nobody could blame her for overvaluing the Empire’s offerings. She’d only get in trouble for leaving money on the table. When she received her copies back a few days later, she dutifully deposited one on her boss’s desk on the way back to her own. “Before I forget,” she added, “make sure we get a gift for the ambassador.” Lehrgen didn’t reply immediately. When she heard him clear his throat, she looked up. Great, she winced. Someone doesn’t approve. “Degurechaff, are you suggesting we try to bribe him?” And if I were, would it matter? she wanted to ask. “Aboveboard” wasn’t exactly the word of the day. Go through all the work to put a plan to dance around the law together and he was worried about gifts amounting to a handful of bills. “It’s a custom we should adhere to in order to appear respectful,” she explained. It hadn’t been particularly relevant in her old job, but any aspiring businessman learned how to deal with Chinese clients, just in case. “I don’t see why a fair and mutually beneficial transaction should require any extraneous personal gain.” “They won’t see it that way. If we want to make a good impression, we should be polite and observe their way of doing business.” “And how would you know this is the custom?” “Plenty of travelers who make their way over there feel the need to write a book when they get home, like eating shark suddenly means they’re interesting.” “Not impressed by many travel memoirs?” Lehrgen asked with a laugh. Tanya shook her head. Not that she’d actually read any, but it felt safe to say she wasn’t going to be amazed by tales of strange eastern peoples. All that would be amazing would be to see how much the author could make mundane life sound exotic and incomprehensible. Lehrgen pulled out a few bills and waved them her way. “Buy something appropriate,” he told her. “Since you seem to be the expert.” “Just an avid reader,” she replied mildly to the sarcastic tone. Defusing was better than defensiveness, especially when you didn't know the reason behind it. “Sorry,” he apologized. “Just stress.” “Oh?” The first rule of office politics: know your own standing within the company. The second rule: know your boss’s. There was a difference between a worker being valuable and that value being recognized. It was a mistake to think that just because she saw it everyone else did. Plus, excelling at keeping your nose to the grind and doing your work well didn’t prepare anyone for the stab-behind-the-back-with-a-smile competition that defined the upper echelons of management. It was a skill she’d had to start working on once she’d realized where her career was heading. If Lehrgen needed some help with it, she could give him a few pointers. She’d also need to take some steps to make sure her career didn’t falter on account of his. “General von Schleichel will be the one closing the deal,” he told her with a grimace. “Is that a problem?” Normally, outstanding employees didn’t worry when their boss dropped by. Their Director of Operations was in the office only infrequently. Mostly, he rotated between cozying up to politicians for assistance and heading off to the regional armies, leaving the paperwork and day-to-day running of his staff to his dependable deputy in Berun. “No, I just don’t know him well and he’s close with Romel, so it’s important that the few meetings we do have go well.” “Is there a reason they wouldn’t?” “I suspect he wonders if I’m angling for his job. It’s more complicated than that, but that’s the gist of it.” “Are you not?” “Once things are running smoothly enough that I don’t have to spend my Friday nights catching up on work, then maybe,” he said, shaking his head. Saying that after expecting me to outsmart an international treaty at the drop of a hat? Tanya scoffed to herself. Talk about high expectations. You couldn’t put those on other people without having them for yourself. She’d been born without any advantages, and he had them all. You could practically say it was his duty to use them. Don’t be lazy. Say you want to be some political big-shot one day or something, she muttered internally. As long as he didn’t get an ego about it and listened to her advice when she rang him up, then she really would have nothing to worry about. She could try that route herself, but it would be a substantially more uphill climb. Anyways, the person pulling the strings in the background never had to worry about annoyances like assassination attempts. Let someone else feel the thrill of being shot at for a change. “I’m sure Schleichel will have more pressing matters on his mind,” she told him, tapping the hefty contract sitting on Lehrgen’s desk. “There’s no reason to hold yourself back.” “Let’s hope so,” he sighed. “Did I give you enough to buy what you need? If you want more-” “It’s a token of friendship, sir. Not a bribe,” she reminded him. “I’ll be interested to know what you end up getting them,” he said, waving her out. Tanya turned around and left before she rolled her eyes. She never should have said a word. All it had done was put her in charge of shopping. Was it so much to ask for real work to do? On second thought, it’s for the best, she thought a few minutes later. There was no way to predict what Lieutenant Sauer would have bought if Lehrgen had charged his adjutant with the job instead. Probably exactly what she was holding in her hands. She’d walked into the first sort of high-end gift shop she found and asked for a piece of Imperial handiwork. She’d been presented with a set of knives forged by one of the country’s best brands. Four glinting edges meant business in precisely the wrong way. “Maybe something more...friendly,” she suggested, handing them back. “I paint these myself,” the owner said, taking a nutcracker down off a shelf. Tanya turned it over in her hands a few times. As a gift, it would definitely work. A novelty, but not a cheap or useless one. A cultural tradition. Everyone could appreciate the irony of one army gifting another a toy soldier. It was even painted the right colors, bright red and blue. Personal dislike was no good reason to refuse to purchase it. She’d simply never liked them. The way their mouths were painted made them look like something really annoying would come out if they could speak. She paid for it and asked the owner to wrap it so she wouldn’t have to look at it any longer. The more it stared at her, the creepier it looked. The damned thing left her apartment two days later when she handed it over gratefully with a bow to an ambassador surprised by the gesture. At that point, she didn’t care whether he liked it or not, she only wanted it out of her possession. Its stupid face kept popping up in her dreams. That over with, she settled at her seat in one of the Qin embassy’s sumptuously appointed rooms and began to observe. Maybe we don’t want to get rid of him, she thought, carefully considering Lehrgen’s boss. The Army could use more men like that in the lead. A soldier on the ground caused operational headaches when he did anything besides apply a single-minded focus to completing his objective as quickly and directly as possible. A general near the top of the food chain caused international headaches if he was incapable of anything besides completing his objectives as quickly and directly as possible. Schleichel had avoided that pitfall and was more focused on establishing a relationship with their hosts than closing a deal before lunch. For now, she’d work on getting some facetime and a baseline of trust between the two of them. She’d need to emphasize that her loyalty was to the organization, not to any particular person within it. It wasn’t strictly true. There was one person working in the General Staff Office whose best interests she kept at heart. She’d never betray her own self. But by telling a little lie, her job would stay secure no matter what happened with her boss’s career. A positive impression of her chain of command was the first pleasant surprise of the day, but not the last. The group had taken a pause for lunch. Before it arrived, Tanya could smell that it was more than Imperial cooking coming from the kitchen. There was no question that the basket that came out first had some type of dumpling waiting for her. Once she bit into a pork bun, there was also no question that she would be asking for seconds. When the next dish came out, she couldn’t wait to dip her chopsticks in. Or fork, rather. Her place setting had come with a fork. Asking for chopsticks would have looked strange. Halfway through gulping her food down as slowly as she could make herself, she looked up at the rest of her party. Her boss was twirling his fork around hesitantly like he was trying to pick up noodles only. One member of her group was staring at the bean paste and tofu like it might be an enemy in disguise. All along, the key to destroying a Europaen army’s morale had been simple. A wall of natto would be impenetrable. They’d be done for. She was almost done for when she bit into something that set her mouth on fire. Tanya hadn’t eaten anything truly spicy in her life and her tongue was quick to remind her of that fact. She could still feel the lingering heat on her lips well past the end of the meal. It provided an unwelcome distraction from the continuation of their pending arms sale. She was so focused on it she almost didn’t realize when they reached a standstill. The Qin ambassador flashed a note to his army attaché, one she could catch out of the corner of her eye. She couldn’t get every character, but numbers were simple and unforgettable. The Kingdom was prepared to take the Empire’s current offer. The trouble was, she was the only one that knew they didn’t need to drop the price any further. xXx When it came down to it, most people were predictable. Usually, it was no trouble for Brigadier General von Lehrgen to guess what someone was coming to see him for. That wasn’t to say they never surprised him, but he could pick up on the patterns when they were there. If it was someone from the training section, they were there because they knew he’d still lend a hand on personnel questions if he could. If it was someone from procurement, they were going to beg him to intercede with General von Romel on their behalf after he’d asked for something impossible. If it was his adjutant on a Friday afternoon, it was to check if he could leave early because he’d accidentally committed to two dates on the same night and now had to take one of them to an early dinner. The endless repetition of office life had even managed to wrangle Tanya into a modicum of predictability. The mistake had been in getting complacent, in not realizing that once he brought her out of it, all bets were off again. She was marching over to him too purposefully for a casual conversation. He couldn’t begin to guess what for. All day she’d been acting strangely. And strangely for Degurechaff was saying something. First, she’d remained utterly silent on the occasions that General von Schleichel had made inconsequential slip-ups when speaking about the document she’d prepared. She wasn’t one to hold back, so he’d gotten ready to tap at her arm if she so much as opened her mouth. Against all odds, she’d behaved herself. That paled in comparison to what had come next. The handful of times they’d shared a meal, she’d been nothing if not a picky eater. He’d never seen a clean plate once. Maybe she needs an outlet for risk-taking, he’d thought with a shake of his head, watching her devour whatever was placed in front of her with a ravenousness he’d previously only associated with her appetite for blood. He couldn't pretend it hadn't been hard not to burst out laughing when she'd eaten something too spicy for her palate after being warned several times. He shouldn’t have let himself be surprised, but he was nonetheless given another shock not long after that when Degurechaff had revealed an inexplicably intimate level of knowledge over past and potential future conflicts between the Qin and Akitsushiman people. During what should have been easy banter over lunch, Lehrgen thought she’d gotten the whole table convinced that the Imperial Army’s weapons might come in handy against enemies other than communists. Both negotiating parties had broken apart a minute ago to consult amongst themselves as to their final offers. Apparently, something about that had prompted her to seek him out. “We should stick to our last price,” she said quietly, though there was a firmness to her tone regardless. She didn’t need to shout for her voice to carry a ring of complete authority. “Do you think they’ll take it?” “Yes,” she stated simply. A thought struck him then. A very silly thought, but it was out of his mouth before he knew what he was saying. "Degurechaff, you can't…you couldn't read that note, could you?" He’d seen her squinting curiously at the characters minutes before, but out of everything, that hadn’t seemed strange at the time. He’d done the same. It was a fascinating way of writing. She didn't even deign to answer, opting instead to give him a flat stare that told him he'd just asked her the stupidest question she'd heard in the past month. "Never mind," he said quickly, with a shake of his head. "I just saw you looking at it and…never mind. How can you know they'll come up to our number?" "Do you trust that I know what I’m talking about when it comes to finance?” “You know more than I do, at any rate,” he replied with a slight shrug. “Then trust me on this, sir. Please.” “It’s not me you need to convince,” he said, giving a nod towards Schleichel. “I’m sure he already has a good impression of you courtesy of Romel. If one of us has to tell him how to do his job, he might take it better from you than from me. That doesn’t mean you can press the issue.” “I wouldn’t do that,” she said firmly. Lehrgen waited until her back was turned to shake his head. She had a rather sarcastic sense of humor, which he didn’t mind so long as it wasn’t directed his way. She'd deadpanned her last statement like it was God's honest truth. She was right, as always. A few tense minutes of holding out and the Empire got the price they wanted. "Take the rest of the day," he told her as they left. It was a bit early, but there was no point in making her return to work for no more than an hour or two before beginning the weekend. And anyway, he still owed her for Christmas. Briefly, he wondered what she even did with her free time. For his mental health, he was probably better off not knowing. It was hard to imagine that Degurechaff had any wholesome hobbies like baking or volunteering, so he'd assume that all she did was read and study, and hope it wasn't something worse. He should verify that in any case. Today had proved that she was as capricious as she’d ever been. The party stepped out to wait for their car, and Lehrgen looked up at the sky, wondering if he’d wake up to snow the next morning. In the past few weeks, winter had dwindled away quietly and given way to spring. Officially, today was the first day of the new season, and this morning had been balmy and breezy. The temperature had dropped precipitously while they’d been inside, and now held that curious thickness to it that presaged winter precipitation, as if the season was an old boxing master wanting to prove he had one more fight left in him before he retired. A few seconds behind him, Tanya stepped outside with a curse. He looked towards her and saw she was wearing nothing more than a light jacket. It would have been perfectly comfortable earlier in the day, but if he was feeling the cold through his overcoat, hers was little better than nothing. I don't have to give her mine, right? he asked himself. He would have done it for any other woman, but...She wouldn't do it for someone else, he concluded, deciding he was under no obligation to swap places with her. He watched her walk towards the U-Bahn station in obvious misery, shoulders hunched and arms crossed over her middle, and then jogged a few steps to stop her. He'd belatedly realized the fault with his reasoning. It might be true that she wasn't the sort of person who had the common decency to help others in need, but denying her the favor would mean he was just as heartless. If there was one person he didn't want to be compared to on that count, it was Tanya. Plus, what would his coworkers say if they thought he was that petty? "Here," he told her grudgingly, holding out his heavier coat. "I'll be in a packed car on the way back, and I keep an extra at the office." She stared dubiously at it instead of grabbing for it, leaving them both locked in a shivering battle to see if her offensively impolite hesitation or his desire to adhere to the rules of polite society would win out. “You can take mine instead if you think it will fit you better,” General von Schleichel said, pausing as he made his way to the car. Degurechaff’s head whipped around to the other man with the same look of unfounded concern. Schleichel was halfway through taking his own off when he paused. “Actually, Ritter’s the smallest of us all,” he commented, peering around towards the driver. “I’m sure he’d be happy to lend his.” “I don’t mean to trouble everyone,” she coughed, snatching Lehrgen’s coat away, which meant he could get into the car before he died of exposure. He stifled a laugh at how silly she looked as she walked away, the coat swallowing her up to such a degree that it would be more accurate to say it wore her than the other way around, and then shook his head, still confused about what possible reason she could have had to refuse what might have been his first offer to her with no ulterior motive. Besides wanting the trophy for the most dangerous person in the office, she apparently had designs on the award for the most bizarre. 




 

 Tanya and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day






 
 "Life is never fair, and perhaps it is a good thing for most of us that it is not."
 
 April 2, 1930Reichsbank Building, Imperial Capital Berun
 Middling. That was the word he was looking for. Very middling. From his seat at its head, Heinrich Schenk looked down the expanse of the empty table below him. It dominated the room, disproportionately long for its width, and it was wide enough to seat two at either end. Minutes ago, the day’s final meeting had adjourned, each of the men who occupied a spot at the grand table filing out in a column of black suits as somber as a funeral procession. Middling, each of them was. Uninspired, undistinguished, unremarkable. Relatively speaking, of course. These were the same men chosen to sit on the Reichsbank’s central committee. Not a one of them was uneducated or unaccomplished. They were academic men, methodical men. Visionaries and activists they were not. There was a reason Schenk had been appointed president of the bank and the rest hadn’t. Someone had to be responsible for sliding the odd unorthodox recommendation into their debates. Someone had to be responsible for halting the debate in favor of taking action. Occasionally, other members of the board were capable of the former. Rarely, in the case of the latter. Schenk paged through the stack of papers in front of him. Half a meter high and most of it not worth the ink it was typed with. Minor modifications and incremental improvements competing for recognition. Trifling as they were, not a single one had made it out of committee to land on his desk in the past few months. Busy as he’d been with redomininating their currency to have more backing it than the guarantee of a government that underwent a crisis of confidence every other week, he hadn’t had the time to demand a stop to the endemic plague of conjecturing and theorizing that infected the board. Damn, Schenk hissed to himself, glad to be alone in the room so he could suck at the smarting papercut on his thumb. It had caught him precisely at the worst angle. A drop of blood welled up to stain the bottom of the page, and he watched with morbid fascination as it spread, the paper’s capillaries drawing a sort of branching pattern in bright red. He prayed it wasn’t a sign. With a curse towards whomever had typed the thing, he pulled it out. In a stroke of fortune, it was the very proposal he’d been looking for, the least unoriginal generated during the time he’d been unable to attend meetings regularly. Oskar Lang, Schenk repeated to himself, finger tracing over the name of the author on the cover page. Middling even at being middling. Smart, very smart, no one could deny that. But a by-the-book bureaucrat if there ever was one. Every time an imaginative idea threatened to come out of his mouth, a thousand minor objections of procedure this and policy that shouted it back into oblivion. A man living out his creed that humans were created to be tools of obscure regulations and not the other way around. Eyes on Lang’s presentation, Schenk pushed his chair back and rose from his seat. His feet ambled aimlessly towards his office while he read it over another time. It was a solution to their economic predicament. One that he’d given thought to himself, though never in such a thorough manner. A solution he wasn’t keen on unless and until it became necessary to consider. His country had done enough begging in the past two years. The rest of Europa could only be marginally less tired of hearing it than the Empire was of doing it. He wasn’t above reconsidering his position in light of concerns more broad-ranging than monetary ones. So long as the financial system wasn’t failing, he was prepared to handle the economic fallout that would result from a few years of stumbling. The political fallout of the economic fallout was another beast entirely. And not one he’d like to find himself staring down in the wild. “Gertrud,” he asked, passing his assistant just before he opened the door to his office, “which of the girls typed this?” “That was Frida, sir.” “Send her up, would you?” Tall, lustrous dark hair, cheeks glowing with health, the woman shown into his office a few minutes later would have been quite pretty if not for her choice in lipstick. She worked at a central bank for God’s sake, not in the back room at a club. For having been summoned with no warning to the president’s office, she carried herself with a great deal of self-confidence. “You aren’t in trouble,” he began, perhaps unnecessarily. “I expected you hadn’t felt the need to fire me personally, sir,” she grinned. “What can I help you with?” “Lang had you type this?” “That he did.” “Dictate it to you? Give you his written notes?” Her eyes darted down to the floor. Back to him. Back to the floor. She drew in a deep breath, then lifted her gaze steadily to meet his again. “For my own knowledge,” Schenk clarified. “Nothing more. I’m simply curious as to whether I’ve misread the man all these years.” “It came already typed. I only added the notes he’d made. Details and things.” “Came from where?” “I don’t know for sure, sir,” she said, with a shake of her head. “Only it was the day after he went to meet someone at the old General Staff building.” Involuntarily, Schenk’s eyebrows migrated into his hairline. “Are you saying this came from the Army?” Frida gave an uncaring shrug. “Could be a coincidence. Mr. Lang likes to tell me things. He mentioned he was going. He got all puffed up over it, wondering why some general or other was sticking his nose in our business. Next day he gave me this.” “Coincidence indeed,” Schenk sniffed. “Thank you. Back to work now.” When Frida left, he reclined back in his chair. He’d expect the Army to be concerned about dissatisfied voters, alright. Concerned that there weren’t more of them. With the right number of people behind the wrong politician they could regain their status as a minor deity that extracted a tithe more extravagant by the year. When they had each been appointed care of their respective institutions, he and Romel could have come to a compromise on where to spend and where to save. Neither had the luxury of adding more troubles to an already-overflowing plate. Instead, Romel had put that smooth-talking Schleichel in charge of whispering in everyone’s ears asking for a little more space in the budget here and a little less oversight there, with not a word of thanks or explanation to the man responsible for printing the money he needed. Schenk picked up the documents on his desk and flipped through a fourth time. There was that saying about gift horses and mouths. The military had leached more than their fair share of bright minds away from other pursuits by promising glory. If one or two of them had a natural inclination towards economics, it was no more than another case of talent wasted on them. By the time someone made the rank of general, they weren’t going to be apt to change careers. The man was probably only a few years from retirement. Give Lang a raw idea, scare him into thinking it imperative enough to take action for once in his life, let him fill in all the boring details, and the origin of the paper began to make sense. A few notable paragraphs stood out and Schacht reread them. Just to be sure his eyes hadn’t deceived him the first two times. Since when has the Army ever cared about consequences? he wondered, shaking his head. Either they’d actually managed to learn a lesson, or the intelligence they were privy to was pointing towards a political revolution in the opposite direction of the one they wanted. In neither case should Schenk ignore it. He lit a cigar and looked towards his clock. The end of the day for him. Only lunchtime in New Yourke. He picked up his phone to dial an old friend. Rather, the son of an old friend, which might be better. Opinions of the esteemed friend of one’s even more esteemed father carried a certain amount of gravitas. “Jack,” he greeted, once the other man had agreed to interrupt his meal to take a call. No matter how he tried, he could never get the name just right. It came out like he was addressing a Françoise man instead of an American one. After too many minutes spent catching up, Schenk wound his way back to the point of the call. “I’m putting something out for post tonight. Give it a good read when it gets there.” “You didn’t need to call just for that.” Schenk blew a healthy puff of smoke and made himself ask for the favor. “What would you say to spreading out your capital on our continent more equitably?” “And you expect me to convince my investors to take that risk? On your economy?” “You convinced them to take one on the Republic easily enough. To this day I wonder how you did it. Did you all hate us that much?” “It was just business, Heinrich,” Jack replied. “Nothing personal about it.” “An interesting business model, underwriting one country to invade another more than twice their size, with the population and industrial might to back that up. The pastor must have given a moving sermon on David and Goliath the Sunday previous.” “You’re ignoring their colonial territories,” Jack commented. “And you’re ignoring my point.” A huff of annoyance came down the line. “Nobody was betting on the Republic winning an all-out-war,” the other man admitted grudgingly. “You thought we’d back down.” “Yes. Back down. Be reasonable. You did it the last time.” “We were reasonable,” Schenk contradicted. “At least in a certain light. When that scuffle over Alsatia happened the Empire was barely past its growth spurt. Not sure we could work out how to coordinate all limbs in unison. Ten years later and we had no doubt. Out of all the other powers, your country should understand that best.” “We understood it was a possibility,” Jack sighed. “Not a probability. And in the event of a turn towards a larger conflict, the Republican politicians made plenty of noises to our own about the Commonwealth’s support. They wanted the Lowlands carved off and the Françoise were doing just that. All I did was funnel the money from our central bank to theirs.” “So there was a reason behind the diplomatic chill,” Schenk chuckled. “I never did believe that sob story about misuse of the Legadonian refugees.” “Sounded better for the papers,” Jack said, with a wry laugh of his own. “It was supposed to be a win-win for us. If all went well, we’d own half the industry in the Lowlands. If it didn’t, the Commonwealth would step in before it was serious and we’d still be counting the dollars we made selling weapons and the loans for the weapons on top of it.” “So what went wrong?” “Apparently, they define serious a little differently across the pond,” Jack snapped. Schenk smiled to himself. There was a beauty to the cunning. He’d wager the Commonwealth had intended on using the financial commitment to lure the States into waging the ground war on their behalf if it got that far. Once it had, both of the Anglo powers had waited for the other to make the first move. Waited too long, the both of them. “And now we’re both stuck in the hole you dug for yourselves,” Schenk grumbled. “Give what I’m sending a read. See if we can’t hold hands long enough to climb out of it.” “I’ll at least look,” Jack promised. “I owe you that.” Schenk replaced the receiver with a firm plunk and stood to don his coat. He dropped the proposal on Gertrud’s desk on his way out. “See that it gets in the morning post,” he instructed, tapping twice where he’d written Jack’s name so she knew who to address it to. “And get me one of the other copies.” It took Jack two days short of two weeks to return his call. “It’s more return than we can expect from loans to the Republic. I’ll give you that,” Jack said. “Though you may want to check on your man that ran the numbers. My calculations come out altogether more reasonable.” “Mine too,” Schenk replied. “But still, you come out profitable.” “In that case, I’m surprised you aren’t asking for more.” “We could trip along on our own without you, if need be. Problem is, we might not get back up one of those times. I don’t think either of us wants to find out what comes after that. I’m asking for enough to make sure we never do. No more.” “You sure what comes next isn’t a military coup?” Jack snorted. “After they hear you came to fraternize with the enemy?” “They’ve given their approval,” Schenk lied. Telling anyone the source was high up within that very institution might give the wrong impression about the intended use of funds. “They never gave their own bankers the time of day. You all taught them that we’re sometimes worth listening to. Under other circumstances, I’d thank you for it.” Jack sighed. “I do see the merit in the idea. But…” “But?” “My own Congress has some ideas on how to use up my available funds already.” “That road project?” Schenk asked. “We don’t have rail like yours, Heinrich. Fifteen years ago we couldn’t chase down a jumped-up Mejican farmer without a logistical nightmare every other day. One basic transport network later and we shipped out half our army to come pay a visit to yours within a few weeks. Secretary of War wants more roads and better roads. Eventually a whole system coast to coast. Those don’t come cheap and we have the money now. What’s my senator going to say when I can’t buy enough of his bonds because I’m tied up in yours?” “I expect your senator cares more about what his largest taxpayers think of him than the other way around,” Schenk snorted. “Isn’t that how it works over there?” “Yes,” Jack said glibly. “But you aren’t supposed to bring that up in polite conversation.” “So then?” “I can commit to some of it. I’ll talk to the other big names around the city about the rest. You’ve cleared it with your politicians?” “While I was waiting for you,” Schenk confirmed. “Turns out fixing up your country’s debt crisis makes a number of men indebted to you.” “Welcome to the club,” Jack laughed. “Good doing business with you.” 
 April 24, 1930General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 Tanya Degurechaff liked being alone. Contrary to the opinion of certain gossipy coworkers she’d previously had, she didn’t hate people. Collectively, humanity was magnificent. Individually, her opinion varied. Even the best people had one or two qualities she’d change if she could. That didn’t mean she wouldn’t put up with a few annoyances for the sake of an otherwise valuable person. The important thing was that their addition to her life was a net positive. She would admit her standards for that might be higher than most. She’d simply never seen the appeal of befriending the class clown or the walking disaster. Or even of befriending someone in her immediate proximity for the sake of having someone to share her idle thoughts with. Predictably, this had resulted in a relatively small group of people whom she was casually friendly with, and a still more exclusive group of close friends. It had never been a problem in her previous incarnation. Modern life was built to be distracting, so she hadn’t needed endless social appointments to occupy her during her free time. Living in the past was an altogether different experience. It was impossible to put into perspective how much boredom electronics eliminated until you didn’t have them. Her apartment could only get so clean. Breaking news wasn’t happening every five minutes. When it did happen, you were lucky if you heard about it by the end of the week. Beyond a certain point, the return on exercise diminished quickly. Even reading lost some of its pleasure when it was an escape from boredom instead of a rare escape from a hectic world into a peaceful, unhurried moment. Especially when all she was reading was a crash course in the specifics of western history that her original education had glossed over. Interesting from an educational perspective, always. From an entertainment perspective, not so much. Typically, work took up enough time that she didn’t find herself in want of anything beyond her usual routine. It also conveniently provided an opportunity to socialize when desired. Too much off-topic chatter and people would wonder what she was being paid for, but if she needed intellectual stimulation there were plenty of relevant topics to choose from and a handful of sharp minds to discuss them with. It had only been a couple weeks back, when her employer had granted her some extra hours to herself, that the company of a like-minded person had drifted into her thoughts as a nice-to-have. Regardless, calling her lack of social relationships a problem would be a serious exaggeration. Given the choice, she’d take too much time to herself over too little. She wouldn’t want any of her coworkers thinking they had an open invitation to her free time because they’d shared a conversation over a drink once or twice. Because Tanya Degurechaff didn’t mind being alone. Often, she enjoyed it. Acquiring a new hobby to fill any unexpected spare time had seemed infinitely easier than acquiring and maintaining a relationship outside the office. In retrospect, ignoring her social life had been a grave mistake. It meant that right now, Tanya Degurechaff was very alone in this world. It wasn’t that she wanted any of her friends in the office to be physically present with her at that exact moment. Now that she thought about it, they were all men. They didn’t belong in the women’s bathroom to begin with, and definitely not locked in her stall. She was one hundred percent confident that her career would never need that type of assistance. All of her connections within the office were perfectly reliable, so she couldn’t call herself totally alone on a personal level. She was sure they’d try their best to help if she ran to find them. Romel and Lehrgen went without saying. She was friendly with a number of the other officers. Major Gustav Wechter had lent a helping hand on a few projects recently. On a professional level, she worked well with Lehrgen’s adjutant, and had known him for years. That notwithstanding, if Sauer thought it meant they had any type of personal connection, she’d rectify his mistake immediately. The usual helpfulness of the aforementioned individuals aside, there were times she’d rather not rely on them. She’d bet her last Mark that in this case, the feeling was mutual. If she was honest with herself, she was no better than an ostrich burying its head in the sand. A hedonist living each day like it was her last. A complete waste of a prefrontal cortex. Of course, she’d known this day was coming. Eventually. Some time. Always one or two years in the future. Not close enough to start acquiring the requisite knowledge or materials to deal with. No matter what, her adjutant was supposed to have been with her. Visha took care of all types of annoying details with a smile. She knew how to make someone comfortable without treating them like a child that needed extra coddling. She could make a conversation feel personable without making it overly personal. Instead, the Federation was still refusing to give her up. They’d made sure the former lieutenant wasn’t in the same country as Tanya, let alone near enough to call for assistance. Even the most powerful politicians aren’t left all on their own during a red scare, Tanya groused to herself, glancing down at telltale blood spots again and deciding that wadding up some toilet paper was currently her best option if she didn’t want to camp out in the bathroom for a few days. At least they can arrest a couple people to make themselves feel better. Unfairly withholding Visha’s help from her had to be worse than anything else the communists had ever done. She stood up and left to give her hands a wash. Pull it together and stop being dramatic, she told herself, making a thorough job of it. Fair doesn’t exist. You’re an adult. If she’d given it more thought, she already would have gone to the doctor to make sure the delay wasn’t a symptom of a larger health issue. Luckily, it was nothing more than a case of needing some time to catch up after an early adolescence defined by sleep deprivation, strenuous exertion, and constant stress. All she wanted was a normal life. She should be jumping for joy. Especially because something she’d been led to believe would be intrusively painful had gone unnoticed until she’d concentrated enough to feel the slight ache. It was enough to make her wonder if she’d stumbled upon the world’s oldest and most widespread work-avoidance conspiracy. With a deep breath, Tanya forced her thoughts to focus productively. There was no point in complaining about biology. The human species wasn’t one that shrugged its shoulders and turned around when the laws of nature threw up obstacles. Her first order of business was to leave the battlefield before her allies suspected she was in a precarious situation. She’d never taken a sick day, so that shouldn’t present an issue. Step two would be to arm herself with the appropriate ammunition and receive training on its deployment protocols. The vague details she’d accumulated on the practical side of things after sharing a tent with Visha were no longer sufficient. Without a doubt, a medical practitioner would be well-equipped. It felt more than a bit silly to interrupt the day of busy professionals to inform them that she was, in fact, perfectly healthy. Waste in the healthcare system was a significant drain on any nation. It was a good citizen’s duty not to contribute. When it came to the office, Romel had a wife. Tanya was supposed to meet her after being invited to dinner at their house to discuss her career options, each better than the last. This would be a weird way of making a first impression. On the other hand, Lieutenant Sauer was having too much fun to settle down anytime soon. Out of everyone, he had the potential to be the most helpful. He was surrounded by women left and right, so there was a fair chance he knew more about them than Tanya herself. That aside, anything that gave him leverage over her was out. Lehrgen...was an exemplary coworker, so the only relationship he kept her informed about was his one with his work. Such a sacred arrangement between the two of them shouldn’t be violated. Beyond her friends, her next option was one of the typists. She didn’t know any of them well enough to ask for personal favors. Especially not this personal. Even so, they’d probably sympathize and offer to help. Which would mean that on top of her own absence, she’d have to find a way to excuse someone else’s. Weiss and Ugar both had families. She wanted to ruin her first vacation as little as she wanted to travel hours out of her way for a simple task. That left approximately nobody that Tanya could appeal to completely guiltlessly. It can’t be that difficult, she nodded to herself. A trip to the nearest pharmacy was all she really needed. She could figure it out from there. She returned to her office and gathered her things to leave. She pulled together the documents that she had for the afternoon meeting she’d be skipping and made a few quick notes. For the most part, it was already put-together enough to present to her boss. She knocked on Lehrgen’s door. Once. Twice. No response. It was half-open, so she tentatively pushed it the rest of the way in. “General,” she said, clearing her throat at the doorway. He stayed as he was. Head bent forward. Both elbows were on his desk, with each of his palms resting on his temples. Whatever he was reading must have been gripping. She watched his fingers beat out an unknown rhythm against the top of his head for another second to give him a chance to notice her standing there. When that failed, she walked closer. She only had so much patience for politeness today. It took her standing directly across from him and a repeated call of “Brigadier General,” louder this time, to snap his attention to her. He looked up with a start. She pulled at her shirt before she caught herself. No matter how many times she told herself that if anything, straightening her shirt was calling attention to the fact that it didn’t lie flat, she couldn’t break the self-conscious habit. Another item to check off her list of activities she’d been leaving for the future. An undershirt really wasn’t cutting it as the only thing under her button-down. “General,” she said again, “might I be allowed to leave for the rest of the day?” “Yes…” His brow furrowed slightly. “Are you alright? You look like you’ve seen a ghost.” "I'll be fine. I just…I'm just not feeling…myself," she replied, waving her hands around like an idiot. She couldn’t pick which symptom she wanted to name as the culprit behind her departure. It was the truth in any case. This stood in stark contrast to all of her previous life experience. "I can call a driver to take you to the doctor,” he offered. She shook her head emphatically and grimaced. This was the one time she’d like him not to be overly concerned about her well-being. "It's nothing serious, I just need a bit of…time.” “Alright,” he shrugged. “I’ll give you the notes I had for our meeting,” she promised, leaving to go get them. “Degurechaff, we can wait until…” his voice faded once she was in the hall. She’d already done the work. Unscheduled leave was a total nuisance to the rest of a team. Handing off everything that was complete would be the least interruptive way of handling it. "You're sure you're alright to go home on your own? You really don’t look well,” he asked, when she returned to drop off her papers. "Thanks for the concern, but I'll be fine. I just need to go.” "Right, well, take tomorrow off also, and hopefully whatever it is will be better by Monday.” He gave her an encouraging half-smile. “And if it isn't, you are allowed sick leave, you know.” “Thank you,” she said, trying not to let it gush out like she was desperate. Which she was. Desperate for a bath. A bath was the first thing she wanted, and a change of clothes. After that was taken care of, it was off to the pharmacy. Waiting in line to speak to someone shouldn’t be necessary. She knew exactly what she was looking for. Or not, she huffed to herself. Nothing on her side of the counter looked remotely recognizable. She looked towards the line of customers, the person at the head having his medication explained by the pharmacist loud enough to make it everyone’s business. With a cringe, she wiped a hand down her face and steeled herself to wait her turn. She’d probably never see a single one of these people again. Maybe Being X expected her to pray for a better solution. Under these circumstances, that good-for-nothing was guaranteed to be even more clueless about humans than normal. No, maybe he can be a little helpful, Tanya thought, wondering why the idea hadn’t crossed her mind earlier. Avoiding Being X had its limits. It was a hike to get out there, but she’d grown up in a place full of women. And if she kept one of them from their prayers for an hour or two, that was an added bonus. An hour and a half later, she was a supplicant at the doors of her orphanage for the second time in as many years. “Sister Martha,” she greeted. The woman who had opened the door was the only one Tanya wouldn’t want help from. She’d have to pick someone else. “Is Erna free?” she asked hopefully. “Sister Erna is at prayer.” As if the tone wasn’t frosty enough to get her point across, Martha crossed her arms tightly and leaned against the doorframe. Tanya rolled her eyes. Deliberately. Martha had never approved of a single thing she did. All over a habit she couldn’t remember. Reportedly, as a very young toddler Tanya had enjoyed flinging her food specifically at the other woman. Even back then, her aim had been good. Maybe it was because Martha reminded her of someone she’d disliked in her previous life. Maybe it was because she’d been the person to introduce Tanya to the wonders of Imperial cuisine. Either way, Martha had never forgiven her. A more perfect representative of the deity she worshipped couldn’t be found. “I wouldn’t want to interrupt,” Tanya said, with an insincere smile. “I’d be pleased to pray with her.” Scowling, Martha opened the door the rest of the way and walked her back to the private chapel the nuns used. Martha was watching her, arms crossed, when Tanya looked over her shoulder to check. Rolling her eyes again, she knelt directly by Erna’s side, close enough to touch, and clasped her hands in mock prayer. “Erna,” she whispered, as quietly as she could. “I need your help.” “Okay,” Erna whispered back, after blinking an eye open to see who it was. “Once Sister Martha gives up and goes back to the kitchen.” “Just like old times,” Tanya smiled, despite herself. She hadn’t closed her eyes, so she caught the other girl biting her lip against the laughter she was given to over every little thing. As a child, Erna hadn’t been devout. At all. Seeing her in a nun’s habit for the first time had been more shocking than the first time Tanya had gotten a look at her new self in the mirror. Whenever she’d seen the chance, she’d tapped Tanya on the shoulder to let her know the nuns were all praying with their eyes closed and weren’t watching to make sure the children were doing the same. Erna had snuck off to catch butterflies or play in the stream that ran nearby. It had gotten her into constant trouble. She never did a good job hiding the mess her adventures in pagan spiritual practices made. Tanya had only grabbed a book and sat wherever she was least likely to be found that day. She’d probably read Kinder- und Hausmärchen a hundred times. Her selection beyond bibles and devotional material had been limited. Five minutes after she knelt down, Tanya heard footsteps walking away behind her. She counted to thirty and turned her head, then nudged Erna with her shoulder once she verified their spectator had left. “How did you know it was Sister Martha with me?” she asked, once both were seated on a pew. “She limps a little nowadays. Plus, only Martha would refuse to announce you.” “Only Martha,” Tanya agreed, drawing her knees up to her chest. “So, what brings Ms. Fine-On-Her-Own by?” “I started bleeding,” Tanya told her after a brief silence spent staring at her knees. Erna stood up and moments later there was a pair of arms around her. Tanya let Erna hold onto her for a few seconds. Outside of rare occasions, she didn’t feel the need to latch onto another person. It had taken some time to get over thinking of it as an intimate gesture, but she’d grown accustomed enough to it during her childhood that she could normally accept a light hug without reacting. So long as it was clearly friendly, and the person didn’t smell. She drew away once she decided she didn’t want to waste any more time. “I was hoping you would be more help than this.” Erna brought a fist down lightly on her shoulder in silent retaliation, then motioned for Tanya to get up. “The good news is, we have extras of everything here. No trip to the pharmacy just yet.” “Do they keep everything behind the counter?” “No,” Erna shook her head. “There’s usually a box in one corner. You just drop the money and take what you need.” So that’s what that was, Tanya nodded. She associated boxes like that with charity collections, so she’d avoided it. Erna led her to a closet and began pulling things out and putting them in her hands, then walked further down the hall. “Where are we going?” Tanya asked, once she began to suspect she wasn’t going to like the answer. “To the bathroom.” “Why?” “To show you.” “You can just explain it,” Tanya said hastily. “It’ll be easier if-,” “I was doing advanced calculus by the time I was ten,” Tanya balked. “This can’t be that complicated.” “Fine,” Erna agreed, throwing up her hands. Ok, it is a little complicated, Tanya admitted to herself as she dealt with the contraption a short time later. She didn’t qualify as an expert on how women handled this matter in the 21st century, but she was sure she’d remember if any part of it involved pins and harnesses. The process was so archaic it was hard to believe that less than fifty years separated her from her original birth date. She checked the mirror before she left. She and Erna were the only people that needed to know what was going on. Satisfied there was nothing noticeable about her appearance, she walked closer to the sink to wash her hands. You have to be kidding me, she bemoaned, hand jumping up to stroke at the bumps along the left side of her jaw, right below her ear. How did I miss those this morning? And here she thought Being X had felt badly enough to leave her with a single blessing - clear skin. Hopefully no one else had noticed. She hadn’t seen anyone besides Lehrgen for more than a few seconds. Who was going to call her an equal when she looked like this? Every time she set foot in a bathroom, her day found a new way to ruin itself further. It could be worse, she consoled herself. All told, her face wasn’t in nearly as bad a shape as it had been the first time she’d gone through puberty. “Here’s a few aspirin,” Erna said when Tanya was done, dropping the pills into her hand. “Make sure you keep a bottle at home and at work.” “I think I’m alright,” Tanya told her, attempting to return them. “It’s nothing compared to what I’m used to.” “If you say so, little Lieutenant Colonel,” Erna agreed, in a playful sing-song. “Come back in two or three years and try to tell me that with a straight face. It can take time to get bad. For me, I started off-,” “Great,” Tanya cut her off, despite Erna’s words making her feel the opposite of great. “Thanks. I’ll let you get back to work.” “I should really give you the details on how-,” “I know how it goes,” Tanya interrupted again. The Japanese education system hadn’t left her ignorant of anything besides historical practices. “You don’t need to tell me. But thanks for...for helping.” “Call if you have any questions. We have a phone now.” “Yes, sure,” Tanya agreed absently, eager to escape before she had to stay any longer on the subject. A bath. She wanted another bath. Anybody who described this process with words like beautiful was a complete liar. Maybe she’d just stay in the bath all weekend. xXx In a confusing and often frightening world, logic was a reassuring constant. It was an old trick that Brigadier General von Lehrgen relied on whenever his mind confronted the terror of the unknown. All humans fell ill. Biologically, Tanya Degurechaff was human. And so it followed that she, too, had to suffer temporary defeats at the hands of invisible contagions. Weak was not a term he’d ever used in relation to her. Even when she’d been an unusually tiny little girl, the word had never once come to mind. She was a veteran who’d lived through the most savage aspects of war while maintaining complete equanimity. The prospect of her own death had never caused her half the amount of disquiet that had been on display in front of him. It had been quite frankly one of the most baffling experiences of his life when she’d walked into his office openly in distress, what was normally a fair complexion transformed into a deathly pallor. She’d caught him comparing twin reports on the increasingly dire political climate in Ildoa, one from Elya and one from his in-country contact. Her sudden appearance had startled him so much that for a few minutes, before he’d reminded himself that coming down with an illness was an allowable activity for Tanya, he’d been barely staving off panic while trying to get to the bottom of what was wrong. Normally, Degurechaff operated at a level of efficiency that was better measured on an industrial scale than a human one. It had felt like a reliable machine trying to shut off without warning. When that happened, it was more likely to be a complete system malfunction than an issue of needing routine maintenance. He’d looked up at the sky as he’d left that night, expecting to see a full moon hanging brightly among the stars, but had only found a bare sliver waning away. He wasn’t superstitious, not in the least. Nevertheless, seeing Tanya on the verge of succumbing to despair had been more frightening than seeing her bring the entire Dacian Army to its knees in the space of an hour, a portent of some unknown calamity. A primeval fear of seeing one’s own predator fleeing before another that is stronger, faster, hungrier. Come Monday, he poked a head into her office when he got the chance. He had a piece of news to deliver. Thankfully, he found her back to normal, sipping on her coffee and frowning at her papers. "All better?" Right as she tipped the cup to her mouth, she paused to look at him over the top. "In a manner of speaking,” she intoned flatly, finishing her sip immediately after and precluding further explanation. "A call came in while I was here on Saturday.” "You work on Saturdays?" "Usually." "Apologies, if I'd known I would have-," "No need," he interrupted, with a silent curse at himself for bringing it up. If he wasn’t careful, he’d soon be seeing her six days a week instead of five. Even when her presence wasn’t unpleasant, it was overwhelming. A dark, low cloud on the horizon that could cause a storm any time it chose. He couldn’t be the only one in the office needing two days’ respite from it. "Your paycheck doesn't include Saturdays,” he told her. Leaving it at no need was practically an invitation to spend more time on her favorite hobby. She frowned slightly, tilted her head, furrowed her brow. He could see an objection brewing, one that said her compensation could easily be adjusted upwards if unpaid labor was all he was concerned over. "The new government is stricter about enforcing reasonable working hours, especially for women and anyone under eighteen. I wouldn’t want to have to report myself,” followed quickly on the heels of his last statement. Her frown deepened into a disappointed grimace and she made a disbelieving hmm before taking another sip of her drink. “So what was it you came to tell me?” she asked, once she was finished. "Fischer, you remember, from the bank?” She nodded. “He called. From what I gather the Reichsbank is undertaking a version of what you submitted.” That perked her up more than the coffee, and she straightened in her chair. “I was expecting it to take longer for the Americans to approve. Until they saw the redenomination wasn’t enough to stabilize us.” “It so happens the bank president, Schenk, is a personal friend of a very wealthy American banker. Am I to assume you’re familiar with the name Jack Morgen?" She put her cup down so hard it was half a miracle nothing sloshed out. "Am I to assume they're interested?" "Them, and every other bank that got wind of it. They're all so competitive none of them can stand the thought that one's got a revenue stream the other doesn't." A self-satisfied smile crept across her face. It was the same one she wore each time she put a piece of the world into the place she’d made for it. It was a smile he’d never liked, not until now, when finally it represented a shared victory instead of hers alone. “Sounds like I’ll be increasing my tally of casualties sooner than I realized,” she drawled, sitting back in her chair and lifting her cup once again. Yes, Lehrgen agreed, feeling his heart skip a beat. Very possibly, he would be the first one. There really was nothing to like about her triumphant smirk. “The President of the Republic will be quite an addition,” she continued. His mind blanked for a second. How far do you plan on going? it screamed at her, when it came back to life. A strangled “hah?” made its way out of his throat and she turned her gaze from looking through him to looking at him. “When Monsieur Clement sees my name floating around in the papers and realizes I’m half the reason he’s receiving what he thinks is his due from us…” she clarified, with a sniff of laughter, “...well, let’s hope he has a doctor on standby.” Lehrgen laughed along with her. Not at her words, but as a way of letting out the tension in his gut naturally. Please work on your sense of humor, he thought, reassuring himself that last part about killing the President had been a joke. Or, if not meant entirely in jest, enough to let him know that she wasn’t plotting any direct action against a foreign head-of-state. “I wouldn’t count him just yet,” Lehrgen said, regaining a steady flow of air into his lungs with a last breath of nervous laughter. She looked at him questioningly. “Lang, the other one, he made some additions, revisions, things like that. Submitted it under his own name.” Tanya said nothing, her reply the plunk of her cup back onto her desk, this time hard enough to spill its contents over her hand. If she noticed, she gave no indication, her only further response a clenched jaw and flared nostrils. "There was no other way," he placated, pulling his handkerchief from his pocket and throwing it down in front of her. "I hate to remind you, but along with not sitting on the Reichsbank’s central committee, you don't even have a degree to certify that you completed primary school. An economics paper written by someone whose only education was specialized for combat isn't going to get any traction. At least not until more people learn that isn’t all you’re capable of.” She took a deep breath, turned her head away, closed her eyes. For a long moment he watched as she alternated between chewing at her bottom lip and pressing both together while she sucked them in over her teeth. She turned back and picked up his handkerchief to wipe her hand clean, gaze sullenly stuck looking down, like she was wounded by the thought that her credentials didn’t earn her entry into every walk of life. Briefly, Lehrgen wondered what her résumé looked like. Previous work experience: War; Education: War College; Skills: Waging war, specializing in battle strategy; Personal hobbies: Funnily enough, also war. Even as someone who'd managed personnel for the Army, that candidate sounded like they were lacking something. She looked up, expression fixed in a frown so deep it verged on a pout. "I never realized the Army didn't take care of that." "We used to do something of the sort. There was a program for personnel to catch up on what they missed if they volunteered before seventeen. No official certificate, but it was never a problem. Most mages don’t choose to go into academia. Now that the Army's been taken down to the bare minimum and there aren't any more recruits below twenty..." he said, drifting off with a shrug and shake of his head. Her disappointment was palpable. The realization that anyone might look down on her must have been hard to swallow. She’d spent half her life in the Army being recognized as a prodigy. Always the best, always the smartest, always the strongest. Always the most important, regardless of rank. Despite her piety, he wouldn't put it past her to find God himself presumptuous for assuming He was above her in the natural order of things. He could just imagine her, aged four, paging through Genesis after learning to read and wondering what sort of pathetic excuse for a deity needed a day of rest after only six days of work. "It won't affect your career in the Army," he assured her. If he'd had it his way, the treaty they’d signed would have barred Degurechaff by name from having a career in the Army, among other professions, but his opinion on that matter hadn't been solicited. He’d been counting on the Commonwealth’s renowned intelligence service to ferret out some of the less comradely comments he’d made about her and pass along to the Françoise that they had an unlikely ally when it came to certain topics. As usual, Fate hadn’t taken his side. Tanya gave a cheerless smile in response to his attempt to console her. He took that as his sign to duck out and get back to work. On his way to his office, he stopped by his adjutant’s desk to request another pot of coffee for himself. He needed a shot of energy if he was going to voluntarily add another item to his neverending to-do list. He’d spent plenty of time wishing that Degurechaff would find an innocuous career for herself outside the Army. What he hadn’t considered was whether there was any possibility of her doing so. Her own inclinations aside, she had none of the typical qualifications for careers which might suit both her ego and her academic side. She’d mentioned as much when he’d first hired her. If she were to get her Abitur, that would change. Perhaps, with time, he could convince her that there were worthwhile professions other than the military, or at least ones that would pay her better. If he were to help her acquire a proper education, it would open doors to her that she might one day take, doors that would divert her down another path. No matter how unlikely, it was worth pursuing if it meant that the figures which counted her kills would remain static. Imagining her reaction when he asked her to give up her work to sit in a classroom full of pupils nowhere near her level of intelligence or drive was enough to dissuade him from that route. It would be a wonder if she respected a single member of the teaching staff. If he managed to get her permission to sit for the final exam, though, and, provided her score was good, earn an equivalency certificate due to extenuating circumstances, perhaps she would consider taking it. He couldn’t ask her now. Not if he wanted to move forward. All he’d hear was that there was no point. She’d be enlisting again in three years, and it would render any educational attainment moot. On the other hand, if he presented the idea to her after she'd already been granted the permission, there was a good shot that she'd feel unable to turn the offer down. She wouldn't risk offending her soon-to-be superior officer by wasting all his efforts on her behalf. In any case, he shouldn't get her hopes up by discussing it with her now. It would take some time to figure out the right people to convince and get the necessary approvals, and it was quite possible she'd be required to wait until she was eighteen and the rest of her age-mates were eligible to earn the Abitur anyhow. With a sigh, he collapsed down into the chair behind his desk. There were days when it felt like for each item of work Tanya took off his hands, she created a more difficult one in its place. xXx Tanya waited until her boss was well out of earshot before standing up and kicking her desk a few times angrily. If she weren't at work, she'd scream in frustration. She should have realized things wouldn't go her way so smoothly. Looking at it from a hiring manager's perspective, she wasn't exactly a shoe-in candidate for much of anything. There went all her hopes of escaping the Army anytime, ever, if she wanted a career and not just a job. They were the only ones besides her who knew how employable she was. A certain someone from the bank owed her a favor one day. Employing herself was out. She had no capital. She knew the statistics on startup success. And that was in a good economy. Great ideas didn’t turn a profit without the right place, the right time, the right luck. Taking out a loan when her country was barely skirting economic disaster would be riskier than three-quarters of the battles she’d fought. Even if she were successful, by the time she was ready to start paying off debt, the Great Depression would be lurking around the corner. Certain long-term investments could be a possibility, but they wouldn’t work for an immediate return. It was obvious General von Lehrgen wasn’t going to offer her an easy way out of her predicament. She’d have to work on changing his mind. He’d practically stated outright that he expected her to re-enlist as soon as she was able. It was no wonder. As the only one who could use the Type 95, she had the dubious honor of being irreplaceable. Should she be thankful that her superior wasn't a sexist? It was nice if he didn’t take her gender into account when assessing her ability to contribute productively within an office environment, but she’d really be happy to hear he believed women were delicate and not fit for certain jobs. What was the use in being born before the advent of the 20th century if you weren’t going to use it to excuse some outmoded views on the world? If he’d made one thing clear, it was that his efforts to help her avoid combat had been due to nothing more than her age. Tanya gave a last firm kick to one of her cabinets and made herself stop venting her anger. Complaining wasn't going to get her anywhere. She'd have to make the best of her situation and find another way to attain a proper career that didn't entail handling weapons. Preferably, she wouldn’t even think about them except on her own time. No matter how much she’d been interested in them in her past life, it had been a hobby. Nothing she’d intended on going professional with. She’d never owned anything more dangerous than a kitchen knife. In the meantime, she couldn’t even earn overtime pay. She treasured her free time as much as the next person, but until she had something better to do with it, taking on more hours in exchange for better compensation wouldn’t be the worst be the worst way to spend it. Lehrgen, a stickler for rules if there ever was one, wouldn’t hear of making an exception for an underage worker. Relying on regulations could only have been an excuse. The government only interfered with the military to the extent necessary. They would never dream of auditing the hours each employee clocked. He probably still felt guilty about all the years she’d gone without a day off. If he wanted to make it up to her, she’d rather have the money. All that aside, he’d made it perfectly clear he wasn’t going to change his mind. She’d have to accept her nine-to-five. Or seven-to-seven, more realistically. Thinking back to Lehrgen's comments, he did mention that if people get to know me better, they may be willing to overlook my lack of formal education, Tanya thought, smiling to herself. The process of networking had never been something she relished. Nevertheless, it was a skill she'd honed over many years. All she needed was to find the right opportunity. She sat down at her desk, considerably calmer than she'd been a few seconds before. She had a couple years before she'd have to make an excuse for why she was working in the General Staff Office but hadn't re-enlisted. There was no reason to despair. If she was patient and grasped at the chance to insinuate herself into a situation where she could impress the right people when it presented itself, she should have no reason to worry. 




 

 Lesson 4: One That Looks Good At First Sight Is No Good At All






 
 "A man's face is his autobiography. A woman's face is her work of fiction."
 
 May 9, 1930Isola, Milàn, Kingdom of Ildoa
 Silvio was a man with a problem. A few problems, if you wanted to count each potential indictment as a discrete item. Yes, maybe he hadn’t paid his taxes in full. On the other hand, since he hadn’t paid his personal ones at all, it was possible he’d only forgotten. An unintentional oversight. The result of an over-complicated system. Who could say otherwise? Yes, he’d made some donations to the bank accounts of a number of judges. He was a friendly man. A true Ildoan to his core when it came to generosity. And anyway, it was his job to fight for the best outcome for his companies or his constituents. The judges were the ones who were supposed to give rulings according to no one’s interest but the law’s. So who was really the guilty party here? Yes, there was a possibility he’d mixed up money belonging to his businesses with money belonging to him. Every entrepreneur could tell a similar story. It got confusing when your name was on everything. Besides, didn’t everyone go into business to make money? His investors knew he wasn’t running a charity. Yes, there was some truth to the accusation he had links to the Mafia and their drug trafficking. He was an important man. He had his fingers in many pots. So did they. How was he supposed to avoid crossing paths with them? Or even know that the man he was dealing with was a camorrista? He wouldn’t have any friends if he began questioning everyone’s backgrounds from the moment he met them. And yes, he had a fondness for women. He wouldn’t deny that. What man didn’t? That was a crime he was proud to declare himself guilty of. If she so happened to be a relative of a fellow politician, what was the harm in a few backroom connections? They were the women he saw the most of, dressed in finery for whichever evening event they were all attending. Some nerve, Silvio thought darkly at his peers, as he picked up his napkin to dab his lips clean. He pushed the rest of his meal away. His stomach was too full of worry to fill it with food. What cause did Signore Manneonni have to treat him like this, threaten to expose him and end his career in ignomy? So he’d taken a liking to his oldest girl. She was twenty-three and already married, not a vestal virgin. The man needed to learn to take a compliment. “Madò,” his mother muttered with a shake of her head, summoned from the kitchen by the sound of his plate scraping across the table, dish towel in hand and looking ready to snap it in his direction. “I spend two hours cooking, and what, for this? You didn’t even eat the marrow.” “Mamma. I’m not a young man anymore. I can’t eat like I used to,” he complained. In spite of his words, Silvio reached guiltily for the plate of osso buco to pull it back towards him. He’d at least eat the marrow. He owed her that after he’d come running home from Ruma to clear his head. Even if he’d offered to pay for a cook so many times he’d lost count. The old woman was too set in her ways to eat someone else’s dinners. After his mother took his plate back to the kitchen, mumbling to herself under her breath all the while, Silvio stood up to make a visit to the liquor cabinet. She had made some changes. She wasn’t shy about stocking a little Rossi d’Angera with the money he sent instead of buying her grappa as cheaply as it came. He shook the bottle and cursed. There was barely a single drink left in it. It was much too late in the evening to remedy that, so he poured the remnants into a glass and returned to his chair to sip away at it. Doesn’t our country have more newsworthy issues than my life? he lamented, wondering what good it would do anyone to pursue personal grudges at a time like the present. Ildoa was a country with a problem. A few problems, if you wanted to count each grievance driving people into the streets as a discrete item. Unemployment was high. Unemployment was always high, but since the war ended it had only grown worse. All the factories of Europa had returned to producing goods for export. Ildoa’s could barely compete. Because unemployment was high, labor conditions were bad. Because labor conditions were bad, the socialists were trying to stir up the population. Because the socialists were trying to stir up the population, the other side had to try even harder to do the same. And that didn’t count the people who were still stirred up from mobilizing for war, losing a few battles their enemy had barely cared about, and then coming home empty-handed. The train schedule could only be described as a suggestion. The Eternal City was falling into disrepair. If the cost of bread kept going up, the entire mezzogiorno would revolt en masse. Nobody paid their taxes, including the ones who remembered. None of the other nations trusted them. Even the Pope was busy trying to make sure he wasn’t associated with Ildoa. All this, and Manneonni wanted to talk about Silvio like he was one of the country’s problems. “Mamma, un caffè,” Silvio called, an idea forming in his mind. Perhaps he could help his country. All he asked was that it do the same for him in return. He tipped the last of his grappa into the coffee when it came. The time had come to start taking his politics seriously. All he’d wanted was to make life easy for himself. When the money had started coming, he’d gotten greedy. He’d admit it. He’d gone into politics to protect his businesses. There was no reason he couldn’t do more if he put his mind to it. Now he had something much more vital to protect: himself. And what he’d earned through his hard work. A man could find something to be passionate about in that. He was already a major player in the newspapers. He knew his way around radio broadcasts. A few more smart acquisitions and Manneonni wouldn’t find anywhere to make his accusations known. His oversight had been in not thinking big enough. Bribing a few judges had been a mistake. It left open a far larger field of unfriendly ones, possibly jealous of their wealthier colleagues. If he was going to do that, he should have realized he needed to own all of them. And you didn’t have to pay your taxes to the state when you were the state. What the Ildoan people needed was a leader. Someone who shouted just as loudly as they about what ailed them instead of advising them to remain calm. Someone who knew how to fix everything instead of crying that it was complicated. Or at least someone who seemed like he knew. The problem with today was the amount of information everyone had. It made them realize the world was full of troubles. People were much happier if they read good things in the news. Especially when it wasn’t true. If the people needed jobs, Silvio had gotten his start in construction. Once they gave him the votes, he knew exactly the company that would hire them to restore their capital city to glory. He had no need to personally profit. He was a wealthy man. But a little profit would make sure his company’s interest stayed in line with that of the common citizen. For all the men whose blood was still running hot, he had just the thing. Before the country could march into territory that rightly belonged to them, they needed to have control of their own country first. A second reunification of sorts. Of course, actually trying to make good on any claims the Ildoans had on foreign lands would only bring trouble. Any fool could see that. The trick was to never run out of problems within your own borders. After political enemies were dealt with, all those aspiring soldiers could get to work on forcing the rail systems to run with the same efficiency as the famed Imperial ones. And after that, there’d be something else. People felt better when they had a goal they were striving for than when they reached it. Silvio’s head tipped back so he could finish his coffee. He looked down at his watch. Not too late yet. It was time to make a call to a certain Neapolitan after his own heart - the type who was politically well-connected and didn’t waste time trying to pretend he was a man who couldn’t be bought. “Listen, chiatton,” Silvio said, after the men had greeted each other. “You want to make some money off me?” The other man chuckled, and with that, Silvio began to explain the details of what he needed. Nothing too extravagant yet. Someone to help smooth things over with Manneoni, at least for now. Someone to reassure the political class he wasn’t a threat until it was too late. It wouldn’t do to let someone in on his plans, especially not someone who would sell his secrets to the highest bidder. Invented enemies and exaggerated prosperity wasn’t a game anyone could keep up forever. Long enough to make the people think of him as a beneficent godfather was all he needed. After that, he’d slip quietly away and blame his successor for not filling his shoes. No matter that some parliamentarians knew the truth, the average person would never forget his reign as one of pride and progress. That was the sort of power that sent politicians into well-funded retirement on an island instead of whichever jail he’d be sent to if Manneonni got his way. Silvio wouldn’t mind exile from Ruma. Actually, he’d prefer it. It smelled. There was too much work. He couldn’t indulge himself as much as he’d like. He could already taste the salt on the breeze blowing across the balcony of a villa on Capre. Or Sardignia. He wasn’t picky. 
 May 26, 1930General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 Brigadier General von Lehrgen paused before he knocked, fist in the air. He was on the verge of violating the sacrosanct silence of an office before eight. And doing so on that most holy of mornings - a Monday. He knew Tanya got in nearly as early as he did. They’d accidentally crossed paths a handful of times in the six months she’d been working. In strict accordance with the laws governing such meetings, they’d proceeded to ignore each other’s existence beyond the barest of nods so as to provide no opportunity for the work day to begin earlier than scheduled. With a word of apology to the god of small satisfactions, Lehrgen rapped twice on the wood, firm and commanding. A tentative attempt could reasonably go unheard. Or more likely, heard but unacknowledged under the pretense of being unheard. It didn’t prompt an immediate opening. Nearly on the brink of raising his fist again, the knob turned and the door jerked backwards with wrathful force so that he could be greeted by the beatific sight of Degurechaff’s death stare. Truly, the way he wanted to start every morning. He doubted if she’d finished her second sip of coffee yet, if the steam rising off of it was any indication. He wouldn’t bother with exchanging pleasantries. There was little point in doing so with someone wholly incapable of acting pleasant prior to finishing a cup and a half. Preferably two. “I have some good news,” he told her, before she could grumble sullenly at the intrusion. Despite her surly attitude, he was unable to keep a slight smile from tugging at one corner of his mouth. She didn't betray any inquisitiveness over it, did nothing more than raise her eyebrows in a way that suggested he should get on with whatever it was he wanted to say and leave her in peace. “The Ispagnan ambassador will be here this week. They’ve agreed to help mediate with the Federation over releasing our prisoners of war.” On its own, that was cause enough for happiness. It wasn’t why he’d come to tell her. He wasn’t sure if she realized that she did it. The way she talked when she said “Serebryakov” this or “Serebryakov” that, how her tone morphed from a lifeless recitation of fact into one with subtle animation. It was the same with a handful of other names, though they were spoken with less frequency. Maybe it was his imagination. Maybe it was a complete lack of understanding over what drove her. Regardless, it represented a chance. A hope that the right person could influence her. And if that was true, he didn’t doubt that Viktoriya would exert a positive force over her ill-tempered friend. Tanya wasn't an especially excitable person, so he didn't expect her to start jumping up and down upon hearing the good tidings he'd brought. Nevertheless, it did garner a reaction of sorts, so long as he was willing to count the look of extreme annoyance clearing off of her face as a sign the news was welcome. "That's good to hear," she said, the ghost of a smile making itself known. "I was wondering how long it was going to take. I wasn’t under the impression it was normally this difficult of a process." Lehrgen shook his head. "Usually the other side isn’t falsely accusing us of failing to release our own prisoners.” The Empire had been perfectly within its rights to jail communist revolutionaries on its own territory. Territory that was no longer theirs, true, but it had been at the time. The men had been arrested for violating law and order, not taken as prisoners of war. They shouldn’t be subject to those conventions. Everyone knew that. Even the Federation. Nonetheless, Moskva had acted the part of champion on behalf of Polaska, refusing to release the last of the Imperial prisoners until the Empire released the citizens that were no longer theirs. “Still, two years to reach an agreement?” Tanya scoffed. “There’s more politics involved than usual,” Lehrgen shrugged. “The Federation doesn’t trust the Commonwealth or the States will mediate fairly on behalf of communists. Quite rightly, in all honesty. The current Ispagnan government has leanings more acceptable to Moskva. And not so far in that direction that we can’t trust them ourselves.” With a sigh, Tanya nodded. “How long until…?” “A few months until anyone’s released, I’m sure,” Lehrgen replied. “And it will likely be a piecemeal process. But at least there’s finally progress being made.” "And how are prisoners prioritized?" “I’ve already submitted Serebryakov’s name as a high priority. She’s one of our most talented mages. Trouble is, the Federation almost certainly knows that. In the interest of coming to an agreement quickly on the bulk of the soldiers, our mediator may very well suggest we leave her and the other mages for later.” Degurechaff scowled at that. "Is there any way the ambassador could be persuaded to make sure that doesn’t happen? At least not with her?" "I have heard…" he began in haste, encouraged by Tanya’s reaction, the sentence petering out upon realizing he wasn’t sure what good it would do to tell her. The ambassador was known to be weak to certain types of charm, the types that were missing from groups of middle-aged men. The problem was, Degurechaff had none of the naïve charm of a young girl. She defined absolute zero on that scale. She’d be equally as useless, if not more so. At least most gentlemen had learned how to be diplomatic when it came to asking for favors. If it came down to it, Sauer would be several times better at making wide, innocent eyes that tugged on heartstrings as they pled for help. What would really make a difference would be if Elya were in town. She could apply a far more effective sort of charm to the request. “...never mind,” he finished. “What?” “Nothing.” “Is it something that could help?” Lehrgen cleared his throat. “I’ve heard the ambassador has a soft spot where women and girls are concerned.” Degurechaff’s face began to transform from one of mild interest back into the glare she’d had when she’d opened the door. “You could talk to one of the typists,” he clarified quickly. “I’ll do it,” she spat. Did I...offend her? he wondered. There was nothing she could do about being young, but that wasn’t stopping her from fixing her personality. On that count, she could only rely on one thing. She had a charisma that was as magnetic in its pull as it was in its ability to repel, the assuredness of a prophet who had seen the truth of the world announcing her revelations. It forced everyone to acknowledge her, one way or the other. So long as she didn’t stray from advocating on behalf of her friend, the likely reaction from the Ispagnan was the former one. "What's his name?" Tanya asked eventually. "Fernando Quevedo. And I should warn you he can be a bit overly…friendly," Lehrgen replied, choosing his words carefully. "If you think that will offend you, you ought to steer clear." It was all too easy to imagine Degurechaff knocking someone's teeth out for daring to refer to her with a term like "darling," which seemed like the sort of thing the ambassador might do. She did have a penchant for causing international incidents. "And don't say a word about politics unless you can be respectful," he reminded her. "I know you aren't favorably inclined to socialists, but their country is doing ours a favor." “I won’t,” she said, taking a long sip of her coffee. “Assuming it devolves into a civil war, there’s no chance we’ll involve ourselves, is there?” Don’t impose civil wars like it's a hobby, he thought, with a mental roll of his eyes. If she was right about that being Europa’s next conflagration, he’d be delighted to inform her that it had no chance of involving her personally. “You think it likely to get that bad?” She gave a small shrug. "There are no powerful moderate parties. It's not what I'd call a promising situation.” "That's true enough,” he nodded. “Still not enough reason to try our luck with a proxy war. They’re nowhere close to any border of ours. Nor are our economies especially well-linked.” She blinked a couple times, like she hadn’t been expecting that answer, then stared down into her cup for a few seconds in dejected silence. “And if it was a country on our border? One of our own former territories?” she asked, still looking down. He sighed. She could never leave well enough alone. A political revolution in the Ostrian Empire would be different and she knew it. Their southern neighbor was suffering the effects of separation comparatively worse. “I can’t say we wouldn’t feel the need to declare for one side or the other,” Lehrgen sighed, rubbing at one of his temples. “Though right now, the looming disagreement looks to be the Ostrian nationalists and the Ostrians waiting to rejoin our empires. No matter what anyone would like, that’s not a debate we’re allowed to have an opinion on.” "Right," was all she said back, before finally looking up. There was only one way to interpret the look on her face: Leave and let me finish my coffee in silence. He took that as his cue to go call Elya to report the same news. Undoubtedly, that conversation was going to be a far more pleasant one to have. xXx Feminine charm. It was a difficult thing to put a finger on. Was it a matter of having a good figure? No one could say that Tanya didn’t cut a fine silhouette. She dressed as impeccably as her coworkers, with the exception of wearing a belt instead of suspenders: trousers and a button-down that left room to move. It didn’t make for a womanly figure, true. But an agreeable-looking one. Did it have to do with a pretty face? Now that her skin had cleared back up, Tanya’s wasn’t bad. There weren’t any obvious issues she needed to cover up with makeup or a distracting hairstyle. If you looked, she even had nice eyelashes. If part of charm had to do with making those eyelashes flutter, that was where she would admit defeat. She’d tried in the mirror last night. Just to see if being born with two X chromosomes had magically gifted her the ability. It hadn’t. Suffice to say, having a gnat fly into her eye while staring directly at the sun may have produced better results. Was it looking coy? What did that even mean? Descriptions that subjective were useless. Aghh, Tanya thought, placing her hands on the bathroom counter and hanging her head. It’s impossible. I can’t do it. Her impression of the past had always been that creating and fulfilling unscientific stereotypes had been something of a recreational sport. Men were men and women were women. That’s what her one grandfather had ranted on about that time her older cousin had gone through that phase where she used boku and sprinkled da everywhere. It went without saying that in that outdated model, men only wanted women and only wanted them to be ladylike. Tanya wasn’t anyone’s idea of a perfect lady. It wasn’t something she had a mind to become, especially not for the sole purpose of attracting attention. Admittedly, in this one instance, it might be useful. I have to do it, she told herself, looking back up. The other women in the office didn’t know Visha. Nobody in their right mind would agree to go bat their eyelashes at some old man over a problem that didn’t involve them. She didn’t need to be best friends with any of the typists. That didn’t mean she wanted them to hate her. A colleague at her old job had jilted one of the admins. After that, he’d lived in one of the outer circles of hell. His lunch orders were always wrong. His mail came late. Documents sent to the printer went mysteriously missing. It had taken him a year to get his broken chair replaced. A year. Being insulted when someone came by to say show a little leg to close the deal wasn’t a matter of being male or female. It was a matter of self-respect. It was anyone’s right to use that method of persuasion if they wanted to. Making it an obligation was, among other things, an HR nightmare. It was good she’d stopped Lehrgen’s train of thought. She might have saved him from some nasty pranks. Regardless, he was right about one thing: she couldn’t compete as a woman. She’d have to do it as a girl. A child from before the era where children were told they could do anything they set their mind to. What a bullshit piece of advice. Helpless it would have to be. There was no question that someone had to make an appeal for Visha. Lehrgen wouldn’t have interrupted her morning two days ago if he could guarantee her swift return himself, so it would look bad if she refused to help. And let it never be said that she shirked her responsibilities. If it weren’t for Tanya, Visha never would have ended up imprisoned. That was a simple fact. She’d been stuck as the unlucky adjutant to the girl responsible for giving Zettour the idea for a quick-strike battalion. She was the only member of the 203rd who hadn’t endured it voluntarily. Her choice had been forced, but technically, Tanya had picked the assignment. Beyond that, Visha had been conscripted. That meant, like Tanya, she was a rational person without a death wish. A war maniac languishing in prison didn’t deserve her effort. A victim of the Empire’s policies had to be treated the same way Tanya would want for herself. Lazy excuses like fair and unfair aside, keeping prisoners as a supplemental labor force guaranteed they weren’t being used to their full potential. A prisoner would do the bare minimum required. Any talents or innovative ideas would go completely to waste. It was impossible to get anything but a substandard effort from people whose freedom had been taken from them. Well, it’s not like I can expect communists to understand the beauty of the free market, Tanya reminded herself, giving a firm nod to her reflection and leaving to go in search of the ambassador. If logic couldn’t convince the Federation to let go of all its prisoners, the next best objective was to have the most valuable ones released first. Compared to the average person, Visha had much more promise. Letting her human capital go to waste any longer was a travesty. If that could be corrected by acting the part of a teary-eyed little girl for a few minutes, any decision-making strategy would tell her it was a worthwhile tradeoff. Tanya spotted the ambassador in the hall. With a deep breath, she fixed her goal in her mind and marched over. "Mister Quevedo?" she asked, forcing her voice to sound bright and cheery. "Yes, my dear?" he responded, turning around to face her. Don't react, Tanya reminded herself. Undeniably, a willingness to introduce himself to a stranger that way while in a professional setting did not bode well for the rest of the conversation. The man did a double-take when he turned around fully and saw her. Tanya did one of her own. She had to fight the urge to slap a hand over her face. Finding a willing member of the female staff to do this for her would not have been troublesome. Speaking strictly objectively, Quevedo was a handsome man. At this point, it would be awkward for her to back out. "What's a girl as lovely as yourself doing in that outfit?" he mourned. Tanya glanced down. Problematic would be the kindest thing to say about that statement. It would be equally problematic if she failed to hide her reaction. She’d hope that looking away came off as shy. "They made me fight in the war," she said, curling in on herself like she was a tragic heroine scarred by the memories. She remained staring at the floor. Putting on this act with a straight face was impossible. "Now this is the only job I can get. I have to obey the military dress code as best I can.” "You poor thing,” Quevedo crooned. Tanya winced at the tone. “I always knew Imperial men were clueless on how to treat a woman right.” Tanya took another deep breath. Maintaining the meek posture required more determination than flying into gunfire. "I heard you might be able to help me make sure my friend gets back home soon," she said, finally lifting her head and smiling hopefully up at him. "Your favorite handsome soldier was captured?" he asked, eyebrows dancing suggestively. Tanya’s eyes immediately went back to the floor. Do. Not. Hit. Him, she repeated to herself a few times, concentrating on a small stain in the rug. By nature, she wasn’t a violent person. Still, she could only be asked to suffer through so many breaches of office etiquette in a row. And she’d thought concealing her feelings when particularly useless employees had broken down and cried in her office instead of waiting until they got home had been difficult. She’d handled restructuring, but it was quite evident that the man in front of her would end up with her colleague who dealt with sexual harassment lawsuits. It was imperative that she kept her calm. He was basically just a harmless flirt. It would be years and years until that wasn’t acceptable in a work environment anymore. He didn’t realize he was doing anything wrong. "She's my best friend," Tanya replied, keeping the innocent smile plastered on her face, the same one that was flushed with anger that might come off as an embarrassed blush if she was lucky. "Her name is Viktoriya Serebryakov. A girl as pretty as her would never have joined the Army if she weren’t conscripted. It's cruel to let her remain in the Federation any longer.” More than anything, Tanya didn’t like implying that Visha should be liberated for such a petty reason. Quevedo seemed like the romantic type. He probably loved imagining himself rescuing a damsel in distress. “Viktoriya,” he said, tapping his temple with a finger like it was going to help him remember. “I’ll see what I can do.” With that, he reached out and patted her on the head. This motherf-Tanya stopped herself before she grabbed his hand and used it to hurl him over her shoulder. Even if she’d turned up the childish charm, she was clearly a teenager, not a toddler. She tried to smile in thanks, and then turned on her heel and made her feet trudge back to her office instead of turning around to give him a piece of her mind. Visha owed her. Big time. She’d signed up for a little acting like she’d done in the propaganda shoot. Not total humiliation. xXx The next time he saw the Ispagnan ambassador, Lehrgen breathed a sigh of relief that he’d been holding in for hours. Ernst had come running to mention he’d seen Degurechaff pull the other man aside. As Quevedo was not sporting a black eye in the aftermath, he could only assume the conversation had gone passably well. Friday was the first truly nice day of the three preceding weeks. Berun had seen so much spring rain the Spree was near to spilling over its banks and flooding the grassy plain that the Staff Office sat on. By now, every shred of cloth in his house felt slightly damp. Finally, the clouds had cleared. He was eager to open every window and let the sun and breeze clear the air. He stopped by Tanya’s office on his way out to tell her that he was leaving early and remind her that she was free to do the same. She had that morning’s newspaper sticking out of her wastebin. Without thinking, he commented on the headline. “Do they really think the Commonwealth will grant them independence so easily?” he asked, clicking his tongue. It wasn’t that he didn’t sympathize with the Hindustani protestors. Violence against unarmed resistors made that near-to-impossible for anyone besides Degurechaff. Regardless, it was difficult to understand how it would achieve much of anything beyond relaxing certain draconian laws. If governments responded amenably to peaceful requests for territorial changes, there would be little need for wars. “I’m not sure I’d call being beaten and jailed easy,” she snorted. “I meant-,” “Without armed insurrection,” she finished, nodding. “Could turn out to be surprisingly effective.” He made a frown of disagreement. “Well, here’s to hoping,” she said, lifting her cup in a mock toast. “You shouldn’t drink coffee so late in the day,” he admonished, letting some inane comment come out of his mouth while he tried to reconcile the fact that Tanya, Tanya Degurechaff, had very possibly just wished success to a nonviolence movement. “It’s tea, if you must know,” she sniffed, turning it towards him so he could see it was the reddish color of any popular brand of fruit tea. “Another victim then,” he grinned. If someone didn’t know what to get him as a gift, always, it was fruit tea, like they’d assessed him as being an aficionado. Wrong. Completely wrong. For the past five years, a mystery package had come through the post on his birthday with an extra-large bag. Despite the lack of sender information, he was quite sure it was his brother’s doing, a form of petty revenge after hearing one too many complaints. Harmless and annoying pranks were a trademark of Otto’s. You’d never know that he was the elder of the two. Tanya had raised an eyebrow at his statement. “I somehow end up with bags of the stuff that I have to give away. Never had much of a sweet tooth,” he explained. “Guess you don’t know what that’s like.” “It’s a curse,” she said, getting up and stretching. “Honestly, it is.” “Anyway,” he began, feeling mentally prepared to undertake a more serious conversation after she’d jarred his thoughts so abruptly, “you...you support the Hindustani independence movement?” She paused what she was doing, papers halfway into the drawer she was placing them into. Looked up at him and squinted her eyes like he’d said something suspicious. Took a deep breath tinged with exasperation and looked away while she closed and locked the drawer. “Imperial policy supported national self-determination for our neighbors a few years back,” she said evenly, back turned while she folded her rain jacket over one arm. “Should the same not be extended under current political circumstances?” That was for the purpose of weakening the Federation, he thought, confused for a moment before her motive in bringing that up occurred to him. Of course. It was a smart extension of their short-lived support for Baltic nation-states. Much of the wealth and power of Europa’s other empires came from their foreign colonies. Without those, their former enemies would be weakened. For that, Degurechaff could stomach siding with a pacifist. Scary, he thought, glad she was turned away so she didn’t see him shiver. Even when she takes the moral position, she’s scary. Maybe more than normal. Normally, she made her offensive views of the world known upfront. He didn’t have to worry about entrapment. He’d made the right choice in blocking her attempts to meet anyone in a legal profession. She could turn any argument on its head. The nation’s laws would be a mess after she was through with them. Disagree, and he came out the unsympathetic one in the argument. Agree unreservedly, and it ended worse. Applied to current political circumstances more globally, or more locally, as it were, staunch support for national self-determination would mean one thing: upsetting their tentative peace by demanding the Empire be given the right to reassemble via international plebiscite. Undoubtedly, many of the Empire’s former territories would vote to become Imperial again. The educated classes would want independence, most definitely, from the Empire or from other powers. The average person likely valued the wealth and safety they’d enjoyed in the years prior to the war more than the names of their countries. If Degurechaff walked her argument to the next logical step, she’d have him agreeing with her on what was, at best, a politically volatile topic. Talking to her without being on the defensive was akin to driving heedlessly through a field of landmines. He cleared his throat, conscious of how long it had taken him to reply. “In theory, it’s a noble aim,” he said slowly, stepping backwards out her door and holding it open for her. “But it’s not always a practical arrangement.” “How so?” Degurechaff made him realize, and more often than he’d like to admit, why he’d heard more than one person claim to hate arguing with him. Somewhere around ten, he’d overheard it said between a tutor and his mother. Just the other week a general in one of the regional armies had said it right before he’d hung up the phone. Naturally, they were both inclined to a semi-Socratic form of questioning, deceptively simple queries that forced the respondent to trot out claims ripe for refutation. It was a trait he’d had to work on correcting in casual conversation. Most of the time, he didn’t intend to put anyone on the defensive. Having it turned on him like so made it obvious why it got under everyone’s skin. He had yet to decide whether he appreciated the challenge or not. “Efficient use of resources,” he said, with an arrogant grin that would fit better on the face of the woman descending the stairs in front of him. There were no words harder to win against than one’s own. “The Commonwealth’s market access goes deeper and wider than any of their territories could achieve on their own.” “Largely because of artificial barriers to trade,” she countered. “It would be disruptive to have to renegotiate terms with an independent Hindustan, true. But it's very possible to replicate the status quo if all parties are willing. And besides, that only counts material resources. The vast majority of the country is impoverished from constant resource extraction. The untapped human capital could be immense if it were utilized correctly.” Human...capital? Utilize? he thought, raising his glasses so he could rub at his eyes. Her creativity in applying mechanical terms to people couldn’t be denied. At the same time...he thought, reaching up to run a hand through his hair and fix a piece that had fallen instead of blowing at it in annoyance like he wanted to. At the same time, valuing people the same way you would value a piece of machinery meant there was a mechanism through which she could be persuaded to assign value to some human lives under some circumstances, if you were willing to use her own backwards logic against her. It was a baseline he could work off of. “You’re probably right about that,” he agreed mildly, squinting against the sun after he pulled the door to the building open. He could feel the self-righteousness radiating off of her as surely as he felt the heat of the late afternoon under several layers of uniform. “Still, there’s hardly been a worse time for disruption to the world order than now. We’re still recovering from the last one.” “Meaning that now’s the time to press the advantage,” she said, stopping next to him on the curb while he waited for his adjutant to bring a car around. “For Hindustan, maybe. For us-,” He paused at the sound of a honk. A handsome red car pulled up along the curb, the interior a rich cream. Apparently, the Ispagnan ambassador was fond of driving his showpiece himself and making sure everyone saw it. Tanya gave a low whistle of appreciation. Out of the corner of his eye, Lehrgen saw his own ride trundle up behind. “Viktoriya, yes?” the ambassador asked, tapping his head. “Yes, sir. Thank you,” Tanya replied, ducking her head appreciatively and then resuming her inspection of the vehicle. Soon enough, Lieutenant Sauer had joined so that he could get a look himself. Eager to be home, Lehrgen headed off towards his car. Ernst wouldn’t leave him waiting long. "I'm glad you like her," Quevedo commented. Lehrgen heard him pat the side of his car. "She's almost as pretty as you are." Lehrgen stopped dead. His head whipped around in time to catch Tanya attempting to smile. It came out as more of a grimace, if she wanted his opinion. "If you'd ever like to have a good time, I'd be more than happy to give you a ride," Quevedo continued, winking at her in a way that made it clear the comment was not about cars. With that, the other man drove off, leaving the rest of them frozen in place. Tasteless joke or no, that wasn’t something fit for the ears of a girl. Depending on your tolerance for being slapped, it wasn’t particularly fit for the ears of adult women either. Definitively, it wasn’t something you’d say to one of the Devil’s henchmen, no matter that it was currently possessing a human-sized doll, without expecting some consequences. Over time, that theory was seeming less likely. It had yet to be entirely ruled out. "Give me the keys," Tanya said peremptorily to Ernst, seething with rage and pointing towards where the offending party was stopped in traffic not far ahead. Sensing that he was dealing with an apex predator who was out for blood, his adjutant immediately obeyed her request, and Tanya was shortly in possession of the keys to a heavy, reinforced, military-issue automobile. "You don't have a license," Lehrgen got out, too late, imagining what level of destruction she would be capable of wreaking behind the wheel if she could manage to get the car going. The excuse might have seemed trivial, but Degurechaff was loathe to actually violate laws. She'd just skirt her way around them when possible. "You don't need a license to hit people with your car," she snapped. If he could sum up what was wrong with her thought process in one interaction, this would be it. In a technical sense, she had a point. Becoming a legally licensed driver wasn’t a prerequisite for committing vehicular homicide. But there was just something fundamentally wrong with her way of thinking about how laws worked. "We need him alive," he sighed, motioning for her to hand over the keys. “Getting the last word by driving away,” she muttered, staring down the street with jaw and fists clenched. Getting the last word by making sure he can’t say anything more isn’t exactly fair either, Lehrgen grumbled to himself. He turned to tell her the same. “Degurechaff…?” he questioned instead, more than slightly worried that the emotional swing was a sign of a psychotic breakdown. Giggles. He was watching her fight to contain giggles. It wasn’t a word that belonged with her, but it was the only way he could describe what she was doing. She waved him off. "It's nothing," she said, still laughing, "nothing, I just remembered where I – I can’t believe I – it’s hard to explain." She finished the bout of laughter and dropped the keys into his hand. He was too dumbfounded to care about an explanation. It was hardly the first strange reaction he’d seen out of her. Aimlessly, like the gravity beneath his feet was no longer trustworthy, he walked to the car and climbed in. Cautiously, Ernst got in the driver’s seat a second behind him. Neither spoke for a few minutes. Near to exiting central Berun, the other man cleared his throat. “Do you...need a drink?” he ventured. “More than anything,” Lehrgen replied, pinching the bridge of his nose. What if there were more of her? echoed continually through his mind. Doomed. Ten years from now, the world was doomed. “Me too,” Ernst laughed, leaning his head down onto the steering wheel while they were stopped. There were days when Lehrgen felt bad about poisoning the younger man’s mind with the same fears that infected his own. “Any preference?” “Somewhere too loud to hear myself think,” he replied promptly. “It’s early,” Ernst said, looking down at his watch. “But it is a Friday. There’s a good biergarten not so much further up past Hallesches Tor. It’s on the canal.” “Do you know every bar in the city?” “I’m sure I’ve missed one or two.” Lehrgen was self-conscious entering the establishment. He tugged at his collar. It marked him, singled him out from every other man in uniform so that he could never blend in with the crowd. Already, the tables were near to being half-full. Anyone in the city who could find the time to spare had turned out. The seating along the canal was mostly taken in spite of the marshy ground underneath it. There were benefits to the advertisement his jacket made of his rank. Every group they passed huddled closer to indicate they could free up space if necessary. Halfway through their perusal, Ernst stopped and crossed his arms. He looked up and down the waterfront. Glanced back up at the central patio every other second. Lehrgen gave an indulgent sigh. The tables sitting in the grass were conspicuously lacking the fairer half of the human population. The mud near the river wasn’t kind to anyone not wearing sturdy boots. And not so kind to those of us with them either, he remarked to himself, looking at his own pair. He could mistake them for their worn-out predecessors dragged through the ever-damp fields of Flanderin. He’d have to hand them off for polishing tomorrow. He gestured to one of the less-crowded tables and the three men occupying it, working-class sorts who were themselves no stranger to dirt, shuffled to one end. The next few minutes he spent alone, while Ernst retrieved beer and food. A handy method of separating out foreign spies with perfect Germanian accents from citizens born-and-raised Imperial was a willingness to join the conversations of nearby strangers. As a member of the latter group, Lehrgen fiddled with his watch in the interim, putting it back ten minutes so that for once it was slow. It had only been ahead by eight. Ernst returned with a double serving of maibock for each of them and half a roast chicken. The first order of business was accomplished as soon as the other man took his seat - downing one drink as fast as humanly possible. Finishing an entire beer in one long draft was a skill Lehrgen had never managed to learn, no matter how often older relatives, friends, or Rudersdorf had attempted to teach it to him. Ernst was done in a third of the time. Still, it was barely fifteen seconds later that his glass was turned over and the second one was in his hand. “So,” Lehrgen said, knocking a fist against his chest twice to release some excess carbonation, “you think Hindustan has any chance of gaining independence the way things are going?” Ernst paused in the middle of separating the chicken to look up and pay back the indulgent sigh. “Sir…” he said, resuming his knifework, “...can’t we talk about something more interesting?” Lehrgen raised an eyebrow. It hardly got more interesting than questions as expansive as this one. Political impact, emotional impact, philosophical considerations of rights and just governance, all with enough distance from their daily lives for academic debate. “I’m not Degurechaff,” Ernst objected. Lehrgen felt a muscle in his forehead twitch. He put his beer down firmly. Before he could take issue with the implications of that statement, Ernst was waving his hands in front of himself apologetically. “I only meant I can’t say anything besides what’s already been said in the papers. It won’t be much of a debate. If you want to give a lecture, I don’t mind, though,” he said, with a smile and a shrug as he divided the food between them. Lehrgen took out a cigarette. Lit it. Puffed a few times before throwing the pack and lighter across the table. He did not lecture. And he was quite sure he’d never mentioned to his adjutant that a few times it had run across his mind that in another life he might have made a good professor. “You see the police got that killer in Dusseldorf?” Ernst asked, after taking a draw. Lehrgen nodded. “You think it’s true? All the stories? Some of them seem…” he shuddered. “I don’t know. Too extreme to be real.” Gruesome details and food did not a happy digestive system make. Unless you were a nurse or most men between the ages of nineteen and fifty, in which case there was little that could shock and appall enough to ruin a meal anymore. Instead of pushing his plate away like he might have done years past, Lehrgen shrugged, swung a leg over the side of the bench so he could watch the brisk flow of the river better, and continued eating. “I don’t know,” he said, itching the side of his nose to prevent the inappropriate, if humorless, smile from being obvious. “Any time I read about the worse ways they executed people more than two, three hundred years ago, it seems a wonder we mostly stick to killing each other so cleanly.” Ernst gave a bark of laughter. With nothing more than a glance and a shrug between them, a decision was made. They drained their second drinks. The ambassador’s car, how and why the Americans had chosen to survive the last ten years without alcohol, the merits of the television set the office had purchased, those conversations devolved into which country made the next best beer, since the best was undoubtedly theirs, which country had the best girls, since it undoubtedly wasn’t theirs, and on that note, which of their cities held the title in each category. Minna won handily on the first matter. Either Praga or Kopenhaven won out on the second, depending on if you counted only current Imperial territory or also included former. Between each topic was a new glass of beer, and more often than not a new face. Ernst had a tendency to collect friends as the evening wore on. Partway through, when a smuggled-in bottle of liquor made its presence known, Lehrgen removed his jacket. Stuffed it under a leg. In a crowd of civilians, there were too many expectations attached to it. Expectations that he couldn’t meet in the case that he ended the night respectably drunk. He deserved it, every once in a while. Well on his way towards achieving a stupor capable of stealing the mind’s ability to remember that such things as the future existed, let alone agonize over them, he felt a hand on him. It snuck up unsuspecting, took him by surprise, as much for the unexpected intrusion as for the maternal care in it. His reflexes were too slow. He had no chance to bat it away before it was combing errant strands of hair back into place. His head tilted back further so he could see behind him, and the world spun for a moment. Nonetheless, there was no mistaking the culprit, the short, dark hair, the serious gaze in contrast to the mischievous smile. It fit better on her face now than it did twenty years ago, though he’d still hesitate to call it attractive. “Marian,” he greeted, trying to make room next to him. She remained standing, peering down at him with her arms crossed. She was only two years his senior, and yet he couldn’t remember a time when she hadn’t treated him as a much, much younger brother. “Your shoes are going to be an awful mess, you know,” he told her, laughter coming easily to him. “That’s what a maid is for, dear,” she replied, clucking her tongue like a mother hen at finding him in such a state. “I’m surprised to see you here.” “I could say a same.” “The same,” she corrected him. “Work isn’t far. Most of the big newspapers are a few streets up.” “You aren’t in the city often.” “That is the point of being a traveling correspondent, you know,” she said, finally sitting down. Without asking, she took his glass from him and finished it. “Here long?” She shook her head. “No, no, off to Ostria in a few days. Should be back for Christmas, though. Then I’ll write my final word on the harm the unification parties are doing to both our countries. I hope you aren’t voting for them.” Adamantly, he shook his own head. “I always keep up with your articles,” he mentioned. “I should hope so,” she drawled. “I am rather famous for them. Anyway, how’s your brother?” “Fine, fine,” he began, turning inwards. “His youngest is - God, almost two by now. I’m glad you reminded me. I might’ve forgotten to write.” Silently, someone exchanged his empty glass for a full one while he lost himself in catching up with an old friend. Did it a second time half an hour later. She drank most of both. It cleared his head enough to make real conversation, which was a problem he’d have to rectify once she left. “I do believe you’re being summoned,” she interrupted eventually, jerking her head towards the patio. He turned to see Ernst waving at him. Near to shooing him off to have the evening to himself, Lehrgen recognized the woman standing next to him. She’d been a nurse stationed on the western front. One with a habit of sneaking off to find somewhere quiet to eat, same as he had. Given the dearth of options on a battlefield, they’d found solace in the same locations a handful of times. He stole his drink back from Marian and took a long draft. In the end, everyone always preferred Ernst. When he glanced back up, the younger man was still waving at him. Motioning him over, more like. He looked back at Marian, for all the world acting as though he needed her permission to leave his seat. Old habits weren’t easy to break. She shook her head like she was too disappointed for words. For all the ways in which she was forward-looking, she could be surprisingly old-fashioned. One way or another, he was only trying to make sure that he wasn’t stuck trying to count sheep hopping the fence in order to fall asleep. The women who’d been with them deserved that reprieve as much as the men. And the year’s most inopportune comment meant he’d more likely be seeing visions of blonde children stepping over bodies. Probably, Marian would tell the both of them to get their heads checked. “Well, it’s not like you’re interested,” he huffed. She made a great show of rolling her eyes, then pushed one of his shoulders. “Go,” she said, with a forbearing smile. “I’ll see you over Christmas.” xXx A third drink is almost always a mistake, Tanya reminded herself, halfway through her fourth and regretting the decision. The third drink itself wasn’t the problem. It was the all the ones that often followed once you’d failed to hold your ground at two. Allowing her anger to get the better of her and then accidentally letting slip a line quoted from the guiltiest of her former guilty pleasures didn’t mean she intended on becoming one of the barely-employed, dysfunctional excuses for human beings that infested that manga. Ahh, Gintama, she thought, with a shake of her head. There were certain memories she would have been happier leaving in her first world. She’d spaced her beers out properly. The first one might have gone more quickly than was wise, but whiling away time on a barstool wasn’t a hobby of hers. Instead of going straight home, she’d wandered the extensive public gardens east of the General Staff Office. After that, it had only been occasional sips while she made dinner, tidied up her apartment, took a bath, finished a book. And still, she was feeling the effects. There was no other explanation for the impractical ruminations that kept interrupting her effort to write a letter to Weiss now that she finally had something more worthwhile to bother him with than daily trivialities: Visha might be coming back to Berun. Would she stay? Would she pick back up where she’d left off before the war like everyone else had? Would she keep as far away as she could from anything that reminded her of the worst years of her life? Frankly, Tanya wouldn’t blame her. They weren’t questions she could answer for her former adjutant. And really, the answers didn’t matter. How someone else wanted to live their life wasn’t any business of hers. Tanya had discharged her final duty as commanding officer. More than adequately, in fact. If there was any reason to hope that Visha stuck around, it was so that she could compensate for that by proving she had the knack for baking she’d made it sound like she did. With a grunt of annoyance, Tanya poured the remainder of her beer down the sink. She’d had enough, and had spent enough time focusing on irrelevant details. She was going to finish her letter, go to bed, then check it in the morning to make sure her diction didn’t show the same obvious signs of inebriation as her thought processes. 




 

 Shipping Wars I: Tell Me More, Tell Me More






 
 "I have always been of the opinion that hard work is simply the refuge of people who have nothing to do."
 
 June 8, 1930Alerthausen, Vittgensteiner Land, Imperial Province of Westfalien
 “Stop that,” Lina reprimanded, breaking the kiss and slapping the offending hand away. “Someone might see.” “They’re all busy doing chores,” Matheus Weiss laughed. In his house, that was as close as it got to private. Camp life hadn’t entailed all so much of an adjustment for him. He’d spent more than five years serving his country. Hadn’t regretted it for a moment until he got back. Two sisters married as soon as draft notices came for their boyfriends. One widowed a year later. Awkward teenagers now full-fledged adults. Rambunctious children turned into mischievous teenagers. Life had gone on without him. Except Lina. Dear, sweet, faithful Lina hadn’t changed a bit besides growing from nineteen to twenty-four. Through months without letters and a year or more between phone calls she’d waited. Though, that could always be because the town had been stripped of all other eligible prospects. She hadn’t been half so fond of him when he’d left, or she would’ve married him before he’d headed off like he’d asked. There was no shame in showing her how much he’d missed her. He still had plenty of catching up to do. “Matze,” Lina warned him a second time when he went back to what he was doing. She giggled nonetheless, her own hands not helping the situation. At all. “I only get to see you when I come home,” he protested. His bank account hadn’t been empty when he’d returned. As full as it might have been? Not exactly. He’d been more than a little generous with rounds of drinks for his squadron. There was money to be saved before he married. Money for a house with a few bedrooms, if the two sets of twins in the family were anything to go off. There was more of that to be made in a city than on any of the farms around home. He came back when he could. At least once a month. Barely fifty kilometers but more than two hours, the roads being what they were out in the countryside. When he wanted a bit of time with his fiancée, his family understood and made themselves scarce. The unmistakable sound of a wolf whistle pierced through the open window. His head whipped around and spotted two curious faces poked through. “I told you,” Lina said, half-screech and half-whisper. Weiss slapped a hand over a rapidly-heating face. What sort of example am I setting? he bemoaned. Edgar he didn’t mind so much. Elfriede better not get any ideas. Twelve as of today, so they’d be getting to that age soon. Helluva birthday present it was, halfway to showing them how they’d come to be on this Earth. “Mom says you got a letter,” Elfriede reported. “You didn’t see anything,” a voice belonging to another sister commanded, giving both children a light whack on the head. Weiss watched her make deliberate eye contact with both. A sure sign that they wanted nothing to do with the wrath of their eldest sister if they disobeyed. “Sorry,” Louise said, turning to him. “They ran off before I could catch them. Maybe, you know, close the blinds next time?” “Yeah, yeah,” Weiss said, making himself presentable. His personal correspondence still came to the family home. He’d be moving from his apartment soon enough, so long as he didn’t manage to mess up his own life up too badly in the interim. No point in confusing everyone with three address changes in as many years. He knew the sender before he was close enough to read the return information. Only one person had handwriting like hers. What’s the lieutenant colonel have to tell me now? he wondered, taking the letter from his mother and wandering off in search of something to open it with. “Hey, Felix,” he said, knocking at the door to the room his two youngest brothers shared. “You have a letter opener?” “Somewhere,” his brother replied, opening the door. Weiss raised an eyebrow at his choice of attire. It wasn’t every day you saw a robe layered on a shirt from an old costume layered over regular clothes topped with safety goggles and a fur hat. “What are you wearing?” he laughed, while Felix hunted through a drawer. “Mom said to clean my room. I didn’t know where to put these.” Don’t just put them on instead, Weiss thought, rolling his eyes while he sliced the top of the envelope and removed the letter. He could only imagine what Tanya would think if she saw the disorderly way his family conducted their business. He’d invite her if he weren’t afraid it would result in a training program. Or if he thought she’d come in the first place. She didn’t totally ignore his letters, at least. He’d earned enough respect that she dutifully kept him informed about salient changes, still a superior updating her second-in-command of the latest strategic maneuvers, nothing more. He wasn’t sure why he’d expected she might want to put the details of her everyday life into writing the way a friend would, make them seem as close as they had been for the four years they’d spent together. She’d been more than they’d deserved. It was no wonder she didn’t want to go beyond practical concerns with people who’d probably held her back more than anything. He crumpled the envelope and threw it into the nearest waste bin. “Nice form!” Felix cheered, when the cross-room shot landed. “Maybe you should try it,” his sister Elsbeth cut in, gesturing at a pile. “You’re supposed to be getting rid of your worn out things and you haven’t given up one. These are ancient.” “Maybe I can sell ‘em.” “Gross,” she groaned, throwing a shirt at her twin brother. “Nobody wants your underwear, Felix.” Weiss gave a shake of his head, smiling a bit nonetheless. His smile widened as he read the details of the letter. He’d been praying Visha would be home in time for his wedding. It would feel like excluding one of his own sisters if she weren’t there. Lina could meet her and put to rest all those stupid suspicions she’d got into her head when he’d mentioned the communal sleeping situation during desparate times. Plus, she’d make Tanya come along some way or another. Ahh, it’s her birthday soon, he remembered, sitting down in an open chair to pen his reply. Last year it had slipped his mind. She’d never talked much about herself, so besides an observed love of coffee and sweets, there was little in the way he could name about what she liked or didn’t. Chocolate would melt...he thought, tapping his pen on the table. “Mo-om!” he called, voice raised enough to send it booming over the cacophony of a full house. Yelling orders across a battlefield had come to him rather more naturally than it had to others. He waited until he heard a shouted reply back. “Can you get me a jar of jam? One of the ones for gifts?” 
 July 10, 1930General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 Life is good. It was a phrase he wasn’t sure he’d ever say again. Not with the same truth he’d said it with before, back when it had been nothing more than an arrogant affirmation, smiling in the mirror at shoulders that were striped then studded then braided. After the weather broke, the summer had come for Berun, a summer of cool dewy mornings and warm cloudless days, of long evenings that ended only when the rain came to patter soft music on the roof. It was the first summer in eight years that his work has slowed. Not since he was Major von Lehrgen had life fallen into such a normal rhythm that the officer corps could justify time off for more than a day or two in a row. After a bit of convincing, he’d even managed to get Tanya to agree to leave him alone for a week. He’d get another week or so come fall when he took a vacation of his own. A visit to Waldstätte couldn’t be classified as strictly non-work related on account of visiting an old colleague. Still. Rudersdorf wouldn’t begrudge him some leisure time. After years of pestering, before she’d left for Ostria, Marian had set him up at a dinner with that friend of hers he’d always fancied at a distance. It had taken Johanna exactly eighteen minutes to grow bored once he started talking, and exactly eight for him to do the same when she did. There wouldn’t be a second date. He’d be getting a letter saying I told you so any day now. That wasn’t the point. The point was, life was headed in the right direction. The rest of the world, at least for the moment, was aligned with that sentiment. The Reichsmarine might be in sorry shape, but the other powers had all come to an agreement as to some limits on how badly they were going to be allowed to outclass the Imperial Navy. No matter how small of a step, it was a step forward. As with all things, Degurechaff was determined not to see it his way. “It’s better than nothing,” he stressed, for the third time in ten minutes. She made a tsk of disagreement, so set on being disappointed with the progress for not being enough she was pacing next to the table in his office where they were supposed to be sitting, her shoulders pushed back angrily so she could clasp her hands behind her back. “Battleships and aircraft carriers,” she huffed. “How does that help us?” “Battleships are the main part of a fleet,” he cried, near to tearing his hair out. “They’re slow and unwieldy,” she scoffed. “And we’re surrounded by land. Nobody needs an aircraft carrier as a temporary base for a bombing run.” “Be that as it may, sometimes it’s the sentiment that’s more important. Would you rather they continue building unrestricted?” “No,” she said, dropping back into her chair in defeat. “Of course not. But excuse me for thinking we’re going to be so far behind on submarine design we’d better hope we never see a naval conflict again or it’ll go in the same section of the history books as Dacia, 1924.” “Who said we aren’t designing anything?” he laughed. On occasion, her humor was in the right place. They were words he came to regret a moment later, when her attention shifted from her own thoughts to focus on him. There were people who needed to know about the ship-building venture in Turgu. Degurechaff was not one of them, and wouldn’t be until the project affected his work in a material way. That she had surmised the importance of keeping their technology current was no surprise. They’d all seen what it had cost the Federation to modernize by haphazard leaps, with neither the technical knowledge nor training they needed. No amount of espionage had yielded exact specifications. Each submarine had been outfitted with a different amalgamation of incorrect parts. The Empire aimed to have a more respectable fleet than that one day. There was no reason to think they couldn’t, so long as they kept in mind it should never grow large enough to antagonize their neighbors. Stop staring at me like that, he begged her silently, feeling his pulse jump in primitive response to the predatory scrutiny, the intensity of the gaze boring into him betraying a rabid interest to know more. “The Navy spends all their time these days day-dreaming,” he coughed. “They’re worse off than we are.” There was no saying whether she truly believed the excuse, but she nonetheless accepted it with a nod. “Our submarines were the most advanced by far by the end of the war,” he continued. “I doubt if anyone besides the States or Commonwealth is particularly close to surpassing them as of yet.” “Ahh, yes, our submarines that could only hit targets they’d have been better off missing.” “Besides that part,” he chuckled. “You ever ride in one?” “I was spared the pleasure.” “Keep it that way if you can. There were times I thought I was going to have to duck.” “I’m in no rush after what happened to that Commonwealth K-class a few days back. Not the way I’d want to go.” “Dove below maximum depth, was it?” Tanya asked, shaking her head. “Not a good week for them. You saw Conan Doyle died the other day?” “You read his work?” he asked curiously. It was the first he’d heard of what might be termed a hobby, a pursuit independent of and utterly unrelated to her fixation with the Army. For that, he didn’t mind letting their conversation drift entirely away and into trivialities. She shook her head. “No, just recognized the name. I hadn’t realized he was still alive.” “He published a book….three years ago, maybe. Didn’t get much space in the papers with the war,” he said, sighing to himself at having his brief hope killed in the cradle. “Before that I think the last one was back when I was a child. Everything else is in serial form.” “It’s hard to imagine,” she snorted, eyeing him. “What?” “You as a child.” “I’d be hard to recognize,” he agreed. “I was blond, actually. Up until I was ten or eleven. Never as light as yours, though.” “Did you read Doyle?” she asked, switching the subject back before he could lapse into divulging any more unnecessary information about his personal life, for which he was thankful, even if her disinterest was more than a little rude. He rocked his head side to side. “Not really,” he shrugged. “I didn’t keep up with the serialization. Only the books. And that more out of fondness for the past than anything.” She raised an eyebrow. “My...ah...a friend from the Commonwealth gifted them to me. Reminds me of Londinium.” “You liked it there?” “Very much,” he confirmed. “Sometimes I wonder if I shouldn’t try to make my way back more permanently.” “That nice?” she asked, despite the frown. It wasn’t something he could explain to her. She’d never understand. She was too single-minded, had probably never suffered a moment of self-doubt over what she wanted to do with her life, not the way the rest of them did. He’d never do it and he knew it. It was nothing more than seeing greener grass on the other side of the channel. A different life. One of relative ease as some unimportant attaché doing nothing more than taking a few orders and leaving work behind as soon as the clock struck five. A beer over lunch, another at the pub, a third when he got home. He spread his palms in response to her question. “Weather isn’t much different. The food is, but it’s close enough you rarely miss home. And they’ve only got about a quarter of our country’s problems,” he explained, with a short laugh. “Anyway, it’s a good memory, and I was hardly going to turn down a first edition set to serve as a reminder.” “What?” she asked, shooting up straighter in her chair, palms slapping down on the table. “You have all first editions?” “Short story collections too. If you’re so interested, you could - ahh - that is, I could bring one in.” There’s being sociable and there’s socializing, he grumbled to himself. Learn the difference. Encouraging a healthy hobby was one thing. Inviting her to browse through his library was quite another. “No, though I’d take a look if you ever wanted to sell them,” she replied, relaxing back comfortably into her chair, legs askew and fingers crossed behind her head. “But on that note, a personal question, if I may?” “Okay...” he hesitated, clasping his hands together, elbows on the table in front of him, chin resting on his knuckles, unsure how to deny her request without being impolite. Her seventeenth birthday was in a week’s time. How she was planning on celebrating, who she was planning on celebrating with, whether she had plans at all, he hadn’t a clue. More than anything, he hoped to keep it that way. He wanted no hint of an invitation to any sort of party she was throwing for herself. Privately, he thought he might be looking forward to her vacation more than she was. He wouldn’t have his respite ruined by seeing her in the middle of it. "What sort of books do you read?" That was all? he thought, shoulders relaxing. He took a minute before answering. For a voracious reader, there were no easy responses. "I haven't had the leisure to read anything purely for enjoyment yet," she clarified. "I thought I might start with some recommendations. I'm familiar with most of the old classics, but nothing recent.” So it is a new hobby, he thought, hiding a small smile behind his hands. “There’s Paul Mann,” he began, starting with something obvious and unobjectionable. She leaned forward and motioned for his pen. Hers had already been dropped in her bag. He handed it over as he continued, naming a few pieces of recent philosophy that could serve as introductions to the subject. From there, she might finally learn about the existence of a concept called “ethics”. Beyond that, for every book he wanted to name there was some reason or other to unname it. The war was a nearly unavoidable subject in most current Germanian literature. Even books that were critical of the event couldn't avoid romanticizing parts of it, and she was deep enough in love as things stood. "How's your Françoise?" he asked. "I know we aren't on the best terms, but they do have a thriving publishing industry.” "I can get through basic conversations with it. Not much else.” "Albish?" “I read it well. Speaking…” she shrugged. “I’m alright.” That’s odd, flitted through his mind. Normally, Albish was a third language to Françoise or Rus. That she chose to acquire it proficiently, and no others, was impractical on top of being atypical. They’d spent far longer at war against their immediate neighbors. “General,” he heard Ernst call, interrupting his ruminations with a knock to his door. “Alright,” he called back. As usual, he’d failed to note the minute hand had finished its trip around the clock face. "I believe Valentin Proust's series has all been translated into Albish at this point," he said, organizing his papers, pausing slightly as he tried to remember the name the translation had used. "A Remembrance of Things Past. Or you could try Francis Fitzgerald.” The name Herbert Lawrence hovered on his tongue, nearly spilling into the conversation the way it might have with anyone else capable of an in-depth analysis of the relative strengths and weaknesses of different navies. No amount of maturity beyond her years excused an adult man recommending such things to a girl. And he’d leave off confessing to the guilty pleasure of science fiction novels. As it was, he'd likely already gone far enough astray from the sort of title that Tanya would consider worthwhile reading. "Thanks," she smiled, making to leave. “I’ll let you get to your other appointments.” “Degurechaff,” he called. She turned back. “My pen.” “Oh. Yes.” She tossed it back to him. “Well, if I don't see you tomorrow, have a nice week off," he told her, figuring he was safe to mention the pending event now that he knew he was not going to be included in any part of it. "I will. I'll be up visiting the Ugar family in Bremmen, I'll leave their number with Lieutenant Sauer in case you need something." Ahh, good, Lehrgen thought to himself. She did find something for herself to do. Though he wouldn't have volunteered himself for the task of providing Tanya company on her birthday, it was as mildly depressing to think that her one-sided friendship with him was the closest thing she could find to companionship for marking her next year as it was mildly reassuring that she was normal enough to want to commemorate the event in the presence of a good friend like Ugar. Now that I think about it... he considered, a brilliant notion coming to mind. Originally, he’d hired her to prevent her from getting herself into a position where she could cause even more harm. Ugar was a sensible enough person and worked in an industry mostly removed from the Army or politics. Lehrgen had read the man's personnel file back a few years ago. His family ran some sort of mercantile shipping business, and not one that tended to intersect with the Empire's navy. Most importantly, he’d hire Tanya without question. “Col-General?” Ugar answered, when Lehrgen called a few hours later, just before he left for the evening. “Sorry for the surprise,” he greeted. “I hope I’m not interrupting dinner.” “No, sir. We tend to eat early so Liselotte can get to bed on time.” Too wholesome, Lehrgen told himself, inhaling a puff of smoke, plagued by a sudden guilt at foisting Degurechaff off on the idyllic family. Until he’d been old enough to conduct himself as an adult, he hadn’t been allowed at the dinner table with them. “The family is well?” “Couldn’t be better.” “I hear Degurechaff is visiting.” “Yes, sir.” “I hate to ask this of you,” he said, rubbing at his forehead, “but I think you’ll want what’s best for her too. I think it’s time she found a place for herself that isn’t in the Army. Wouldn’t you agree?” “It’s not that I don’t agree,” Ugar sighed, “but I tried my hand at convincing her long ago.” “It might be different now, with no war,” Lehrgen pressed. “Perhaps she’ll listen this time.” “If she won’t listen to you…” “I don’t have another job to offer her.” “I wouldn’t want to disrespect her reason for serving,” Ugar said. “A daughter picking up the flag of her fallen father.” A likely story, Lehrgen laughed to himself. If Degurechaff even knew her own father’s name, he’d be surprised. “Anyhow, she’s doing something she enjoys, that’s the most important part,” Ugar continued. “And she always spoke highly of having you as a superior.” “I’m not sure her reasons for it are what you imagine,” Lehrgen replied, another form of guilt entirely making him wince at the other man’s words. “I wish I didn’t know them myself, honestly. Then I might not have to worry about what happens when she gets older.” For now, the age restriction was his saving grace. He’d once thought it would be for the best to keep her in the Army. That was back when they’d been winning the war, when an Imperial victory might have ensured a lasting peace, one that she could do little to destroy. Personnel’s attempts to weed out the worst elements notwithstanding, a full quarter of the ranks were sure to support tearing the unhappy peace they’d gotten instead to shreds at the first opportunity. “Sir?” Ugar asked curiously. “You’re better off not knowing,” Lehrgen sighed. “Just...would you want your daughter doing that for you?” “No. I couldn’t stand the thought.” “Then think of it as doing a favor for another father,” he commented, taking another draw off his cigarette, wondering how low he’d fallen to be faking an emotional appeal on behalf of some irresponsible dead man. “Just promise you’ll at least make the offer to her.” “I’ll see what I can do, sir.” Perfect, Lehrgen thought, hanging up the receiver and picking up his briefcase. Life is good. xXx My first vacation, Tanya thought, skipping off happily to the library after finishing work for the week. Normal life, here I come. There were any number of differences between the hiring process for the Army and a Japanese corporation. To start with, she hadn’t been given much of a benefits package. Obviously, an Army couldn’t function if soldiers started holding up their contract and demanding to take their promised four weeks’ vacation in the middle of a war. That left the process of taking leave largely up to the whim of your commanding officer. Technically, Lehrgen wasn’t that anymore. Jumping at the first mention of time off was an amateur mistake, so it was lucky for her that her boss intuitively understood the position she was in and hadn’t taken her lukewarm response as an outright rejection. Really, it was difficult to find people so naturally suited to managerial roles. Stepping around a food cart, her nose crinkled at the morass of processed meat on display in front of her. It’s a real disappointment about the Commonwealth, she sighed, waving away the vendor’s attempt to sell her on eating an arterial death-sentence. Food that felt close enough to Imperial wasn’t a glowing recommendation in her book. Once the world had forgotten her name, a country with more money and fewer neighbors would be her preference. Escaping a steady diet of meat and potatoes would have been a welcome bonus. Any thoughts her boss was having about making the same move and leaving her high and dry without a patron needed to be eliminated. Relieving some stress was as simple as making sure his workload stayed manageable. That was something she was perfectly capable of helping with. With a heartfelt smile, she pulled open the door to the city’s central library. Making progress was always a good feeling. Simply listing off your accomplishments, no matter how incredible, was never a good networking strategy. That was especially true because the vast majority of her accomplishments had nothing to do with the sort of job she saw herself working in ten years’ time. Plus, there were so many items that at some point it all sounded like gratuitous bragging. If she were to write up a résumé, it would definitely give her prospective employer a "shoot first, ask questions later" sort of feel. Everyone wanted a proactive employee, but unless she was applying to become a bouncer at one of Berun's nightclubs, no one would want to hire someone who preferred to solve problems with her fists over her head. Aside from that, as someone who had worked in HR, she could state with confidence that having the right skills or a polished résumé was only the basic requirement. If you wanted to increase your chances of getting hired, the best thing to do was to know somebody on the inside, and the higher up the corporate hierarchy, the better. If and when she found the opportunity to meet such people, she needed to be prepared to make good conversation with them. There was a natural barrier between an orphan and the sort of person she'd like to connect with when it came to a society that had only recently abolished a monarchy, and that under duress. It was therefore of utmost importance that she be able to present herself as someone who had tastes and hobbies in common with the wealthier classes. Being well-read was something she'd prided herself on in her past life, and she intended on doing the same in this one. Functional value aside, reading was something she genuinely enjoyed. Honestly, she’d be happy to read most anything, but if she was going to get ahead in life, she should start with making sure she it was the right books. Tanya presented her library card to the clerk along with the five titles she was allowed, stuffed them in the bag she’d brought, and made her way home. Time to pack, she told herself, crossing her arms and staring at her closet. For a week-long vacation, she shouldn’t need much. When it came to visiting a businessman, it was better to err on the formal side, so a few of her work outfits would do. No matter how much he’d tried to downplay it, she’d gotten the sense that Ugar’s family was relatively well-off. Claiming to be no more than middle-class was a widely-accepted pretense provided you weren’t fabulously wealthy. In other words, he was a connection who couldn’t be ignored. Losing touch in the immediate aftermath of a war wasn’t what she’d call a unique story. You didn’t realize it’d be the last time you saw someone until a few weeks in. By then, it was too late to exchange phone or address information. On the surface, there was little good to be said about a policy like universal conscription. Like with anything, it wasn’t all bad. There were archived records for nearly half the population in the General Staff Office. Once she’d persuaded a clerk in Personnel to dig up Ugar’s contact information for her, she’d written to him first thing. Letting data go stale inevitably made it more difficult to monetize. A visit to his family in Bremmen had been forthcoming. He’d commented a few times in his letter what a valuable employee she must be at the Staff Office, so an offer to join his company was almost implied. She was leaving first thing tomorrow morning to follow up on that. Tanya folded her best shirt and placed it carefully in her suitcase. Shirts, pants, underwear, pajamas, she repeated to herself, ticking off her mental list. Toothbrush. Socks. Shoes. She was missing one thing only - a bathing suit. After a few days in Bremmen, she was treating herself to a real vacation. That part of her plans she’d kept from Ugar. There was no doubt he’d insist on her having company for her birthday. The last thing she wanted was his six-year-old tagging along and bothering her. A beach chair and a book were all the companionship she needed. Beach towns have plenty of bathing suits on sale, she nodded to herself, latching her suitcase shut and walking into the kitchen for her daily dessert ration: two spoonfuls of the best strawberry jam she’d ever tasted. Some people didn’t appreciate the value of a tough boss. It was disappointing, but Weiss had turned out to be one of them. His letters were nothing more than surface conversation designed to keep her at arm’s length. There had yet to be a suggestion that they might see each other again. She shook her head to clear it. Staying close with former coworkers was always easier in theory. There was nothing unusual about their relationship petering off. A vacation and a networking opportunity, she reminded herself, digging out a third spoonful of jam as an early birthday indulgence. Life is good. xXx Five hours. Four hours. Three hours. Two-and-a-half hours. Two hours. An hour and a half. One hour. Forty-five minutes. Thirty minutes, General Erwin von Romel counted. He hadn’t watched his clock this closely since he was an uninterested schoolboy. Used to be he considered work a sort of vacation on its own. No wife asking for this or that, no children screaming for that or the other thing. Now, work was- Don’t think about it, he told himself with a sigh. For two weeks, pretend it doesn’t exist. Until he got back, he wasn’t going to read a single thing. Not a book, not a newspaper, definitely not a report. He’d make the waiter read the menu to him. There weren’t children at home any longer. A thank you to his advancing age for that reprieve. There was still a wife, somehow, but once you got her away from home she got unstuck from her ways. A thank you to her advancing age, too. No amount of pretending they were newly wed again would result in more children. Twenty minutes, he thought, glancing at the clock again. That’s close enough. He buzzed an adjutant. “Tell the Deputy Director to get out of his hidey-hole.” He poured a drink while he waited. He pushed it across his desk and poured another, slightly stronger, for himself. “You wanted to see me, sir?” Lehrgen asked, not more than two minutes later. Romel gestured for him to sit, then at the drink. Lehrgen squinted down at it. “Ahh, sir…” he said, peering at his watch, “it’s not even one o’clock yet.” “It’s Saturday,” Romel shrugged. “Drink. Don’t tell me one is enough to make you useless the rest of the day or I’ll have to replace you.” Lehrgen picked up the glass. Didn’t drink, just held it in his hand. “Drink. We’re celebrating.” “We...are?” “You’re being promoted.” Romel watched the interplay of bemusement and bewilderment for a few seconds. A joke wasn’t good if you let the other person in on it too soon. Dry humor went right over the head of men who took themselves too seriously so long as you kept a straight face. “...sir?” “Temporarily,” Romel relented. “Drink. It’s an order.” Grudgingly, his subordinate did as requested. “Smoke?” Romel asked. He saw Lehrgen’s hand reaching for a pocket. “I’ve got one,” Romel said, opening a drawer and removing two cigars. “Oh, I don’t-,” “You’re in charge of the office while I’m away,” Romel reminded him. Everyone knew what was expected of them. Still, it was best to give someone enough responsibility that no one called him to ask a question. “The man in charge smokes cigars.” Lehrgen reached across and took the tobacco being offered. One inhale later and Romel was faking a coughing fit to hide his laugh at the very real coughing fit happening on the other side of his desk. “Your father not teach you how to smoke a cigar?” Romel chuckled. “Don’t breathe it in.” “Pipes,” Lehrgen coughed. “He smoked a pipe. I knew you didn’t inhale that.” “I refuse to believe no one’s ever tried to pass you a cigar.” “I just never…” he shrugged, with a final cough, shaking his head. “You getting on alright?” “Hmm?” “Without the family.” His youngest general glanced away at that. “Another drink?” “No - ahh - no,” Lehrgen said, waving a hand and giving a hint of a smile. “I just feel bad saying it.” “Who the hell am I going to tell?” he snorted. He poured himself that second drink instead. “I feel guilty sometimes,” Lehrgen sighed, taking a successful puff of his cigar this time, “that I didn’t see so much of them in the last years. But day to day…” “...it’s not so much different?” Romel guessed. “I think I actually write my brother more now that I know I have to. Can’t pretend I’ll drop by on the train anymore.” “It’s how it goes,” he agreed. “Good. Then you’re up for keeping an eye on your boss. I’d like not to come home to a fight we can’t win.” A grimace and a long billow of smoke were the only responses he got to that. “Here. Take this if you’re afraid he’ll pull rank on you,” Romel said, opening another drawer and tossing out one of the sundry ceremonial decorations he’d been given when he received his least favorite promotion. “You can even sit in my office.” “Sir, I’m not sure-,” “That was a joke.” His office was his office, no matter how much he hated the place. You didn’t invite another man to sleep in your bed while you were away. “And don’t take what I said about Schleichel too seriously,” Romel placated. “The man’s only crime is thinking I’ve always got an ace hidden up the sleeve. I’ve known him since we were first lieutenants. He does nothing without my approval.” Some men didn’t suffer losses easily. Romel was one himself. Still knew when he’d been beaten. It was as pathetic to give up too easily as it was not to face reality. Though he’d admit he had a soft spot where the latter type was concerned. The new political class wasn’t as overwhelmingly fond of his profession as the old one had been. Romel wasn’t overwhelmingly fond of them either, nor did he have the patience to pretend to be most days. That was where an old friend came in. Amiable in a way most career officers weren’t. Smart aside from an irrational trust in Romel’s prowess. The highest-ranked general left from Eastern Command whose remaining grudge against the Federation made him that much more passionate about advocating on behalf of getting the Army what it needed to become a proper defense force again. It was, in his own opinion, his best stroke of genius yet. A person who enjoyed the politicking. Another who enjoyed the paperwork. A person whose every instinct was to move forward. A person whose natural inclination was to hold back. One who would inspire each regional army to play their part with single-minded focus; one who would puzzle over how to best make the parts into a whole. Separately, his director and deputy director of Operations had their flaws; together, they were exactly what he needed. Lehrgen hummed noncommittally to his reassurance. “Trust me on this, Brigadier General. It’s better for you if your hands aren’t dirty with all the politics of it. It wouldn’t sit well with you, and you’ll be no good to me if you don’t believe in what you’re doing. And God forbid we only had me to rely on when it comes to wooing the great holders of the purse-strings,” Romel said with a dry laugh. “No matter what else you think about Schleichel, you can’t help but like the man.” “For someone who claims to hate the politics of the office as much as you do, sir-,” “Don’t say it,” he muttered. “I’ve just found the only way I can to do what needs doing. Doesn’t mean I wouldn’t rather be doing this the straightforward way.” “As you say, sir,” Lehrgen said. The man couldn’t have looked less convinced that he was wrong. “I’m leaving on the hour,” Romel said, knocking back the rest of his liquor. “Have a three o’clock train to make. You’re dismissed as soon as you finish your drink. For the day. It’s good to pretend we have lives every once in a while.” 




 

 Shipping Wars II: My Youth Romantic Comedy Is Wrong, As I Expected






 
 "Hear no evil, speak no evil, and you won't be invited to cocktail parties."
 
 July 13, 1930St. Godehard, Bremmen, Free Imperial Hannseatic City
 I should have foreseen this, Tanya groaned, wanting to bash her head with the heavy book she was staring at. Oversights of this sort were inexcusable. If she'd still been in the Army and had forgotten something as elementary as this, being taken out back and shot for incompetence would have been getting off too lightly. Suppressing the noise of complaint that wanted to escape her throat, she shifted in her unforgiving wooden seat. For reasons so obvious they didn’t deserve mention, she wasn’t exactly thrilled that her fellow soldiers had thought her pious. Regardless, she’d never openly disputed the impression. What with the prayers the Type 95 required and her semi-regular personal “prayer” ventures during War College, she’d almost go so far as to say it was a miracle no one ever asked her to join them in worship. Managing your public image was a must for any professional, so she couldn’t absolve herself by saying she couldn't have predicted the unfortunate circumstances she found herself in at that very moment. If she’d bothered to put any thought into it, she would have known not to schedule her arrival to the Ugar household until Sunday evening. Most good families, a group in which Ugar undoubtedly aspired to be included, went to church on Sundays. Hearing the call to stand, Tanya broke herself out of her self-resenting diatribe, following along a second behind the rest of the congregation and taking the opportunity to adjust her slightly-too-tight dress in the process. At least corsets aren't in fashion anymore, she groaned to herself. Tanya didn't have any particular issue with going inside of churches. She wasn't going to let a personal dispute morph into a superstition that controlled which buildings she would or wouldn't enter. Even if the builders had believed themselves divinely inspired, the soaring ceilings, finely wrought metalwork and carefully cut glass were nothing more than misattributed products of human ingenuity and cooperation. She didn't hate churches. But services? It would be appropriate, at this time, to make a confession: she despised those with every ounce of her being. She couldn’t concentrate on anything better or else she’d miss the cues to follow along. Nothing and no one deserved to be forgiven for squandering away her personal time, least of all something associated with worshiping Being X. Her journey to Bremmen hadn't begun on such a bad note. As she’d suspected, Ugar's family wasn’t hurting for money, regardless of the fact that he seemed to consider them nothing much above average. Describing his home with a word as modest as “townhouse” was only correct by a stretch of the technical definition. It dwarfed a single-family home in rural Japan. Unless her memory was faulty, those hadn’t come with space for live-in staff. It was easy to forget she was living in an era where having means meant having servants as a matter of course. She was prepared to work for her money, so she doubted she’d ever have the liberty to waste it by hiring people to mill about her house all day. Of course, she had nothing against the idea of growing unexpectedly wealthy. She simply put more of a premium on privacy than on avoiding basic chores. That didn’t mean she wasn’t going to enjoy being waited on to the fullest. For one, it turned dinner from a necessity into an event. What had previously been the most pointless part of what she’d learned in her time as an officer - the basics of fine dining - finally got put into practice. Neither her home country nor her orphanage had covered what possessing four separate types of forks was meant to accomplish. Hearing her first name thrown around by someone who was more or less a coworker had been an unexpected addition to the night. On the average day, she didn’t hear the name “Tanya” at all. When it came to work, she wanted to keep it that way. There was value in being treated as another officer. It distinguished her from the other girls at work, notable only for how young she was, which was especially important for preventing any repeats of wearing a borrowed dress. She should have known the change in how Ugar addressed her wouldn’t have any positive side effects. All it meant was that he hadn’t been willing to include her perfectly suitable outfit as an appropriate, if alternative, member of the Sunday Best category. She’d explained she had nothing else to wear. That way, no one could expect her to change. It hadn’t stopped his wife from borrowing something from a friend’s daughter. If Tanya were forced under pain of death to come up with one good thing to say about Mass, it was that it was so standardized. Even the holiday services each had their own set of predictable rites. The service didn't have the chance to drag on at the whim of the priest conducting it, so within the hour her ordeal was over. At their next stop, all she had to worry about was that one of the city’s better restaurants wouldn’t have a single item on the menu that appealed to her. A worry she put behind her as soon as she laid eyes on the fish section. xXx There were some conversations there was no easy way to begin. If he had to - absolutely had to - Maximilian Ugar - just Max to his friends - could have those conversations with his employees, or his business partners, or his clients. He knew he didn’t get every last Mark out of everyone. His father reminded him of it with frequency. That was alright. He’d rather have the friend. And if he could avoid it, which he usually could, he didn’t have difficult conversations with his friends. That brought him to Tanya. She was on a rare and well-deserved vacation. And here he was, about to ask her to spend a day back in an office. Possibly insulting her in the process. General von Lehrgen is right, though, he told himself. She’d never had a family. A home. She deserved a last chance at it while she was still young enough to rediscover some of the childhood she’d missed out on. A year or two to indulge herself. Used to military life as she was, she’d looked startled even to hear her own first name the night before. And this morning, the pitiful way she’d said I don’t have anything different when asked about her clothes, like she couldn’t let herself spend some extra money on things she didn’t need for work. He chewed at his current bite of food too long, working out what he might say if she denied his offer. Oblivious to his indecision, Tanya remained enraptured with her meal. At least she didn’t look like she was about to start drooling. Last night, he hadn’t been so sure. “Tanya?” Ugar began. She looked up at him. “Would you have any interest in going on a tour of my office tomorrow?” It was a coward’s way out. He didn’t want to ruin Sunday lunch by bickering with her over her chosen career. He’d ask tomorrow, after he’d shown her the highlights of what a future job might be. "Yes, I'd like that very much," she replied brightly. "And if you'd like to stay a little longer, I know your birthday is in a few days,” he added. Knowing Tanya...well, he couldn’t guarantee she wouldn’t be alone if she went back home. “We could do something for you." "Oh, ahh, thanks for the offer, but I already had plans.” "Oh? With who?" he asked, gladdened at the thought she’d made a few friends who could be called upon to eat cake with her. "Ahh..." Tanya faltered, scratching the back of her head. He smiled, wondering what she was so embarrassed over. There was no need to feel guilty admitting she’d made a new friend who she’d rather pass the time with than her old colleague Max Ugar. If she'd found another young woman who could commiserate with her, Ugar would greet that news with not a spot of jealousy. "A girlfriend, is it?” he pressed. If anything, Tanya grew even more uneasy at the suggestion. Her face paled so badly she looked at risk of fainting until a florid blush replaced the pallor. "Ahh...n-no," she stuttered out. "No, I was...actually, umm, I was just-," "You aren't going to be alone, are you?" he asked suspiciously, fearing the answer was yes, "I wouldn’t want to think-,” "No," she interrupted, with a nervous laugh. "No. Umm - something’s already been set up after work is all. General von Lehrgen is treating, so I’m looking forward to it.” Ugar gave a good-natured sigh. He had a long road ahead of him if he wanted Tanya to find a life outside her job. Another thing he’d have to work on if she accepted his offer to make a home up in Bremmen was to find her some female friends. The only one she'd had before had been assigned to her. There was nothing wrong with a boss treating a valued employee to a round of drinks, but she'd doubtless have much more fun going out to a bar with some of the other girls around the office, even if she didn't consider them close enough to call friends just yet. Apparently, she realized how underwhelming it was herself. There wasn’t much other reason for her to have acted so uneasy about telling him her plans, though he couldn’t understand why she’d reacted so - ahh. I get it. Even if I wish I didn't, Ugar thought, wanting to shake his head and groan in disappointment. He wasn't a man for gossip, so he'd largely avoided the stories that went round the tables at the officers' club. He'd still heard snippets here and there. Assuredly out of nothing more than boredom and lack of other subjects to talk about aside from the depressing reports from the front, some who knew her back at Central Command had made a game out of theorizing what the future held for the Army's most peculiar little officer. The only thing they’d all agreed on was that she was doing the job she was meant for. As much as he wanted to deny it, even Ugar couldn't pretend he hadn't noticed that Tanya had a conspicuously more cheery attitude around Lehrgen than she took with her other superiors. There was no obvious reason for her to treat him differently than the rest, except one that Ugar had intentionally shut his ears to whenever others got to remarking on it. When you followed that thought to its logical conclusion, it raised some uncomfortable questions. He and Lehrgen were of a similar age. Tanya could be said to act uncharacteristically upbeat in Ugar's presence as well. He didn't want to consider whether or not his wedding ring was the only thing preventing him from likewise being pursued by his young friend. An upstanding gentleman like Lehrgen wouldn’t want to think about it either, so much so that the thought might never enter his mind. Actually, I think he might know, Ugar decided after a moment. Lehrgen was a smart man. It was unlikely the same chit-chat Ugar had overheard had escaped his notice. He’d spent more time in Berun than Ugar had. Plus, it would explain why the other man had come across as so desperate to ship Tanya off somewhere far away from him. If he’d realized her infatuation, it would be an easy way to sever her attachment. I’m not sure her reasons for it are what you imagine. I wish I didn’t know them myself. The ambiguous, slightly ominous way he’d put it became clear once you considered the situation. Truer words couldn’t be said than you’re better off not knowing. He'd even added in being worried what happened as she grew older. Maximilian Ugar smiled despite himself. He wasn’t the only one looking out for Tanya’s best interests. Instead of breaking her heart with a firm denial, Lehrgen was working behind the scenes, painlessly trying to shepherd her away and into a normal life. That was an effort he didn’t mind helping. Even if it meant yet another difficult conversation with her. "I hate to bring this up," Ugar said, clearing his throat, “but I’m not sure who else will.” “Alright…” Tanya said hesitantly. “I don’t mean to pry, really. It’s just, you’re at an age where you might be thinking about - ahh - about relationships. I know I was.” “I know the…” she began, eyes glancing over towards his daughter as she told his wife about her dream from the night before, “...finer details. And I won’t do something stupid over a pretty face. No need to worry about teenage irresponsibility on my account.” She pointedly went back to her meal like the discussion was over because she said so. A mature seventeen-year-old. But seventeen nonetheless. “Just don’t rush into anything, is all I'm asking. No matter the type of person you think you’re interested in right now, we go through phases, it can take a few years to work out what you’re really looking for. Give it some time and see if some of the boys your age don’t start appealing to you instead. We might take a little longer to mature than you girls, but we do get there.” Tanya about spat out the water she was drinking, looking as frightened as a soldier on his first day in the trenches. “I won’t tell anyone, especially not anyone you work with,” he assured her, somewhat unnecessarily given that the person in question already knew. She’d only be more embarrassed if she found that out. “As your friend, I just thought it was my duty to tell you that I don't think it's the best path for you." “I...ahh...I see,” she replied, clearing her throat a few times, blush sprouting anew on her face. Ugar hadn't meant to hurt her feelings, but someone had to take on the job of telling her that she should find someone more suitable and closer to her own age. People who didn't know her would see her attempt to win over a promising Imperial officer and draw the conclusions they always did about the motives of pretty but penniless young women pursuing men with deep pockets. Tanya had lived a hard enough life as it was. She didn't need to add any more complications to it. "It's alright," he reassured. "I'm not trying to pass any judgement on it myself, but others may. If it's really what you want, it's not my place to tell you different, but I want to make sure you've really thought it through before anyone starts talking behind your back." "There isn't much of anything to talk about yet," Tanya mumbled, red-faced and staring down at her plate. "And really, I'm not sure there ever will be, so don't get too worried for me. But, umm, thanks for the advice." Ugar gave her a small grin when she spared a glance up at him. She was nothing if not realistic about her prospects of success. That would make it easier for the eventual rejection to go down. "How did you guess?" Tanya continued, clearing her throat and dropping her eyes back down. Ugar debated before answering, but decided on the truth. "There was a bit of speculation in the ranks over it." She froze, fork halfway to her mouth, staring at him with wide and worried eyes. "No one took it seriously. You were so young then, it was more of a joke than anything. It's just...the way you were acting a few minutes ago when I mentioned your birthday, it made me think it might be true." Other gossip wasn't even worth mentioning, like that one time a visiting captain from the Northern Army Command, deep in his cups, had told everyone within earshot that such an unmanageable woman was better suited to having a wife than being someone's wife. After Ugar threatened to report the man for spreading untruths about a superior officer, that had been the end of that. xXx Tanya's shoulders relaxed again after being suddenly tensed for the third time in the space of a few minutes. That type of rumor was one that could quickly put a dent in a good career. She’d be the first to admit it was a mistake to have reacted so colorfully when Ugar mentioned her having a girlfriend. Fumbling around for an answer was a guaranteed way of making someone suspicious that they’d hit on an accidental truth. In the process of disguising the other accidental truth he’d landed on - that Tanya had no intention of letting anyone disturb a pleasant holiday to herself - she’d given away more than she’d intended. There was no need to be hurtful by telling Ugar she didn’t want his family’s company when a white lie could keep everything running smoothly. Especially not if she expected him to offer her a job. An after-work happy hour with coworkers funded by a boss who likely had a few Marks to throw around was a perfect cover. The most she could say for herself was that she hadn’t messed that part of it up. Her friendship with Ugar and any resulting career opportunities had survived the experience intact. On a positive note, he was more accepting than expected of alternative lifestyles. Maybe more than she was herself of committing to being labeled and fumbling through a whole new set of rules and rituals where relationships were concerned. Frankly, Ugar had always come across as the type of person who thought hand-holding before marriage was a step too far. His main concern appeared to be more along the lines of Tanya tarnishing her public reputation than any private qualms. That, of course, was a problem unto itself. If Ugar felt it necessary to warn her in spite of a personally lenient attitude, it could only mean she faced a real risk. He knew the ins and outs of polite society better than she ever would. On top of that, he’d specifically hinted at it being a problem in her current workplace. It wasn’t a stretch to think that a historically conservative institution would be particularly unforgiving. She’d brushed his concerns off as best she could. She didn’t need him thinking romance occupied any place other than the lowest spot on her list of priorities. Calling it an honorable mention would be an abuse of the term. She wouldn’t rule out that it might happen one day, but she wasn’t some frivolous young girl who was going to care about achieving milestones like first kisses. Ten or more years down the road, once she’d gotten her life running on a smooth, obstacle-free path, afterthoughts like that might get some notice. Or not. Her track record in her previous life when it came to serious relationships wasn’t what anyone would call stellar. It had never bothered her. It was only good risk management to make herself aware of what she might have done to make Ugar so quick to draw conclusions. To her memory, she hadn’t done anything to court that type of speculation. If it was nothing more than a passing joke, as Ugar claimed, there was no point in getting worked up over it. He was too upstanding to participate in sensationalist gossip, so she could trust him to keep the secret now that she’d inadvertently confirmed its truth. That meant she could enjoy the rest of her day without her stomach churning. She received a short tour of the city that afternoon, and then it was back to Ugar’s house for dinner. Predictably, he launched into a rhapsody over his wife and daughter once it was only she and her friend remaining at the table. It was a habit of his if you let him talk long enough without a clear direction for the conversation. “We met through church, actually,” Ugar said, smiling warmly at the memory. “Fifteen years ago as of this spring.” It might have been the least surprising fact Tanya had learned in either of her lifetimes. She nodded along disinterestedly. Once there was a natural break in the conversation, she’d make an excuse to sneak off to bed. “It’s a good way of getting to know people,” he continued, glancing at her out of the side of his eyes. There was a bit of friendly advice, and there was belaboring a point. If she needed suggestions on how to locate fine, upstanding gentlemen, she’d ask. It wasn’t the worst idea for making some connections, but even then, she was out of luck. Her mother had gone and dropped her off at a Catholic orphanage when most of the city’s important figures were Protestant. Some people simply weren’t cut out to be parents. Trying to explain her reasons for switching around her views on a faith that she didn’t have to begin with would be more trouble than it was worth. “After losing the war, I’m afraid I’ve had trouble convincing myself to go,” she lied blithely. “In the end, our prayers went unanswered.” “There’s a reason for everything,” he answered. “It gives you an opportunity to do something different with your life.” Now that was how you got her attention. It had taken him long enough to bring the conversation to work. Though if working for him was going to mean constant reminders on a certain subject, it was an altogether less attractive option than she’d hoped. “For me, it reminded me how lucky I am to have come home, and to have a family to come home to,” he continued. “Originally, I’d committed to being an officer. The end of the war gave me a way to resign and spend more time with them. It’s easy to take your life for granted until it’s too late.” Tanya hummed in agreement. She hadn’t disliked her life as a salaryman. She hadn’t thought it was the best, either. Until she’d been gifted a life where stability, safety, and comfort were more along the lines of goals than minimum standards. She wasn’t sure what Being X thought he was going to accomplish. Taking everything away had only proven that her previous, and extremely faithless, lifestyle hadn’t had anything wrong with it. Winning it back would be the ultimate form of triumph. In this era, being a high-powered salarywoman wasn’t quite as easy, but it was far from impossible. A failure to understand people doomed any project from the start. Supernatural entities weren’t immune. “I’ll never be able to thank my wife enough for being patient while I did a little growing up,” he said, with a small smile in her direction. “But I got there eventually, as most of us do. Just takes boys a bit longer sometimes, I suppose.” Tanya did her best not to roll her eyes. Not only had he drifted back away from any word on available jobs, he was skirting close to a lecture on how she might be going through a phase based on nothing more than maturity differences. If it was as simple as that, she’d have been swooning over that ambassador like everyone else. Or Ugar himself. It was a good thing he had a daughter, or he’d be letting his son get away with bad behavior on the basis of not knowing better. “Well, I still have hope that I can grow upwards a little more,” Tanya joked, seeing her chance to leave the conversation naturally, “so I should get to bed.” “See you in the morning,” Ugar said. “Eight-thirty?” An early bedtime meant that she was awake well before the necessary hour. There was nothing like sleeping in once in a while, but the day of an informal job interview wasn’t the right time. She might not believe in sins as such, but she would wholeheartedly agree that slothfulness was better left to distant mammalian cousins than practiced by human beings who had responsibilities to take care of. Alone at the breakfast table and with two hours to kill, Tanya cracked open the paper and got to reading. "Oh, Tanya, you're already awake," she heard, sleepily yawned by the head of household about twenty minutes later. Curiously, he looked disappointed to find her already up and dressed. It was entirely possible he was looking for an excuse to go back to bed instead of heading off to work. She’d denied him that indulgence by being ready too early. Catching him unawares in his pajamas may have been another mistake. She was living at a time where you practically had to greet your mailman in no less than a suit and tie, so it went without saying that letting a young female friend see you less than fully attired counted as a slight faux pas. Even more so because it hadn’t occurred to her that she was obligated to look away after she glanced in his direction and noticed that he wasn’t wearing a robe. Tanya felt the heat creeping up her chest and neck, working its way to her face. Her body had a penchant for making such displays with alarming frequency, even over something as simple as recognizing she’d made a small violation of social norms. Hastily, she pulled her gaze back to the paper so she didn't continue to cause more discomfort for her friend. He muttered out an apology and returned to his bedroom, leaving her to curse herself for starting their morning off on the wrong foot. xXx Ugar shuddered minutely as he pulled on his dress shirt with as much haste as he could manage, like Tanya's eyes were still on him even though he knew there were several walls between them. He tried not to lay any blame on her, but the way she'd gazed at him so openly before turning her head away and blushing a deep red had shaken him to the core. Just yesterday, he'd been the one to wonder if her cheerful attitude towards him had any deeper meaning. Adding that to her reaction a few seconds ago, it painted an unpleasant picture. Besides that, a growing girl shouldn't have been awake at such an early hour. If he'd known she was up, he would never have entered his kitchen still in his bedclothes. Maybe I shouldn't offer her a job up here, he thought, looking at where his darling wife lay snoring ever so slightly. He wouldn't want to do anything that would cause her grief. No, Tanya will understand if I remind her how serious I am about my marriage vows, Ugar told himself, making a sloppy knot out of his tie but not caring, mind stuck on his resolve to have a necessary but unpleasant conversation with her in the car. As soon as they met in the kitchen again, she rose to follow him outside. To his consternation, once they were in the doorway she stopped right in front of him and then motioned towards his tie. "It's a bit off, you need to…” She trailed off, and began to move her hands, like she was going to do it for him. He took a step backwards. “I’ll find a mirror,” he said tightly. xXx Tanya sighed. It was too much to expect that Ugar would trust a girl to know how to fix a tie. Mimicking the motion he needed to make hadn’t done any good. After waiting for him to undo and retie the knot, she followed him to the carriage house he'd converted into a garage, climbed into his almost brand-new car and then drove off to start the day. "Tanya." "Mm?" she replied, a few minutes into the drive, to her friend's unusually stern tone, mouth full of a bite of toast but wanting to indicate she was listening. His eyes were firmly affixed on the road like any good driver's, so she couldn't make much out of his expression to understand the reason for the tense atmosphere. "About this morning..." "Sorry," she replied promptly, in case he was going to launch into a lecture about how she should have covered her eyes in horror over seeing him in an undershirt. His hands flexed on the steering wheel. "Really, it didn't bother me," she added, eager to assuage the guilt he must still be feeling. When she looked over again, Ugar's ears were turning red, which could only mean she'd struck home. "Well, as a married man, and a father of a young daughter besides, I would never do anything to make them ashamed of me." "I know," she told him. "And no hard feelings about it." Ugar's grip on the steering wheel relaxed at her second reassurance, and he let out the breath he'd been holding. Like a good many things this trip, it should have occurred to her before it did. Ugar must have been mortified thinking about how he'd feel if a friend of his had behaved like that in front of his precious daughter, walking around the house half-dressed. You’d think he’d realize she’d seen more than she wanted to during the war. Putting modesty aside, she’d caught eyefuls of body parts that were never meant to see the light of day. Then again, with Ugar’s good fortune, he’d barely seen any of the front. Within a few minutes, Tanya had arrived in front of a well-maintained old building in central Bremmen. She waited, shivering slightly in the still-cool morning air, as her friend unlocked the door. “How’s business been with the economy?” she asked, once they were inside and had turned the lights on. There was no point in jumping ship, so to speak, to a company that wasn’t a going concern. “I count my blessings every day,” he replied. “With the Lowlands moving towards independence in a few years, we’re already starting to see certain shipments transferring to the ports that’ll remain. It’s helped make up for some of the loss in commercial activity. It’s stopped getting worse, but it’s a far cry from what it used to be. Although sometimes it does feel like I came home from one war only to fight another.” “What’s that?” “With Amburg,” he winked. “Competing for the business coming our way.” “They’re the bigger port, no?” “They are,” Ugar nodded. “And we aren’t terribly far apart either. Regardless, we get more business with the States, and they do more with the Federation. I’d say that puts us in the better place over the next decade or so.” And in the event of a depression, more vulnerable, Tanya nodded to herself. Without needing to bother themselves with questions of what people wanted to buy or arriving at a fair value, a communist government was free to pretend demand was whatever they said it was. The shortages of critical goods and warehouses full of unnecessary junk could always be blamed on something else. If the existence of a problem made it past the censorship, that was. “I guess I’m still the youngest one in the room,” she said an hour later, observing as the employees filed in. “I was hoping I might finally have a junior for a day.” “At your age, you should still be in school.” “That’s not an option for everyone,” she countered. “I’m not the worst off. Some people are helping support families.” “Parents expect their older children to help with the work because people hire them,” Ugar shrugged. “I’d rather be on the side that’s changing that.” There wasn’t much argument to make on that point, unless she was willing to advocate in favor of child labor. A strong economy depended on the skills of its workers. A robust education system was the foundation underpinning future development. It was only good business to make sure everyone acquired basic knowledge. Something like statistical analysis was as important to a farmer as it was to the owner of a factory. By the time she was getting hungry for lunch, Ugar suggested they take a drive up to Bremmerhaven to see the actual port. Before that, they stopped at a little restaurant in the countryside known for a local variety of wurst. If it was really the first place Ugar had taken his wife after they married, as he claimed, he should be counting his blessings for more reasons than one. In a sane world, it would qualify as grounds for a divorce. That’s what love does to you, I guess, she thought, forcing another bite down her throat until she’d finished enough to claim she was full. “Do you mind if I try?” Tanya asked, gesturing at the driver’s seat of the car when they returned to it. “I’m not sure if that’s legal.” “For emergencies,” she said. “Something happened recently that reminded me I couldn’t get a car started if I needed to.” As far as she could tell, the mechanics of driving a car weren’t much different now than they were when she’d learned originally. The same could not be said of the process to start the vehicle. There were several notable components that didn’t exist in modern cars, offset by a notable lack of safety components. Sometimes, she felt lucky not to be dead already after flying through a windshield. The humble seatbelt had yet to gain a wide following. Ugar looked around, like a police officer might be waiting to jump out of a bush as soon as he handed her the keys. “Alright,” he said after second. “Turn the gas on first,” he instructed, pointing at the valve. “Then turn the key.” That was easy enough. “Pull the choke out,” he said next, moving a little to the side so she could reach it. “The lever on your side of the wheel is the spark, on mine is the throttle. You want both of them most of the way up to start.” “Up to start,” she repeated to herself, following his direction. “The starter’s on the floor near the gas,” he said, pointing again. “Then push in the pedal to get the engine turning. Shouldn’t be too rough since it’s warm.” “First gear is down?” she asked after it was started, trying to remember what she’d seen him do earlier. “Low gear,” he corrected. “Down and to the left. The way the clutch-,” “Serebryakov explained that to me once,” she lied, putting the car in gear and giving it a go. Predictably, her first attempt was met with failure in the form of a stalled car. So was her second. And third. On the fourth try, she finally got the motion right, and Ugar walked her through adjusting the various levers into driving position. “Sorry,” she winced a few minutes later. She’d shifted up a gear, which had dealt a rough shock to both the car and its passengers. Once the car was up to a reasonable speed, she could only describe driving with one word: fun. Driving without an endless line of traffic surrounding her was its own type of adventure. She’d driven only on rare occasions in Japan. It was one of the few things she hadn’t expected to miss. “Could I drive back too?” she asked Ugar after getting the car going again after a brief stop. She’d only stalled once on her second try. He nodded. It was doubtful she’d get another chance in the near future to drive again. Unless she came down with a sudden and uncontrollable desire to waste money, there was no chance of purchasing her own vehicle for the foreseeable future. The Empire’s rail network was both extensive and convenient. “It was your thesis that had standardized containers as part of a logistics network, wasn’t it?” Ugar asked curiously, once they were walking along the vast complexes of warehouses and shipyards in Bremmerhaven. “It takes time for everything to transition over, but I think it will be just as successful in a commercial setting. Some of us soldiers that returned back to the industry are giving it a try.” “Yes,” Tanya said tightly. If her thesis had resulted in the intended posting to the Rail Department, she could have overlooked the theft of intellectual property. Respecting the rights of innovators to profit from their ideas was a cornerstone of a functioning market. Needless to say, it left her fuming to see such a fundamental principle violated so wantonly, and at her own expense no less. "You know you're welcome to stay here," Ugar mentioned, as they made their way down a long pier at a leisurely stroll. "As a part of the family, not just as a guest." It wasn’t like Ugar had brought her out to see his company for no other reason than to show off, so she’d been wondering when he’d get around to some type of offer. No matter how secure her job was, there was no downside to having a backup plan. She’d had all her eggs in one basket with her last career, and look how that had turned out. Irritatingly, what was being offered sounded less like a job and more like parents and a sister. “Thank you,” she said, acknowledging his generous offer with a dip of her head. “Though I wouldn’t want to impose. So long as I’m working, it’s less trouble for everyone if I rent an apartment.” “The house has plenty of space. And I’m sure Lise would enjoy having someone closer to her age around.” Tanya bit back a sigh of exasperation. She could feign fascination with children’s talk as well as the next person, but it wasn’t how she wanted to spend her day-to-day life. If Ugar could let her know why he thought she might want to occupy her time playing with dolls, she’d appreciate it so she could stop doing whatever it was that caused the impression. “I’ve gotten used to being on my own in the past few months,” she said. She had to hope a more direct rejection wouldn’t offend him. “For a couple reasons, you might find me difficult to live with. I wouldn’t want something like that to ruin a friendship.” Ugar’s eyes widened perceptibly and he gave a knowing nod. “When it comes to work, I’d be happy to have you, of course. That is, so long as you’re willing to consider it. I know it would mean giving up something important to you. A few things up, actually. But there’s plenty of handsome boys up here,” he said with a wink. “That I can promise.” If she weren’t in public, she’d bury her head in her hands. Couldn’t they drop this subject? His intentions might be helpful, but that was the problem. Her friend had a good heart, so he’d earnestly throw himself into finding a way for her to “settle down”. Obviously, he hadn’t grasped that this simply wasn’t an important part of her life. Extrapolating from his own experience was all well and good, but that shouldn’t extend to Ugar not taking her at her word. Despite her annoyance, Tanya gave him a small smile in response. She knew his heart was in the right place. "I'm sure there are, but I don't need to meet every single one of them," she joked, as a gentle rebuke. “But I’ll keep the offer in mind.” “No pressure,” Ugar sighed. “It’ll always be open.” With a quiet word of thanks, she pointedly switched the subject back to the specifics of the newest ship Ugar's company was designing. A subject from which they did not stray for the remainder of her time in Bremmerhaven. I should stop taking things for granted, Tanya resolved to herself later that night, kicking at the covers for what felt like the fiftieth time in an effort to fall back asleep. She turned her pillow over again, rolled to her other side and then dragged herself to the opposite edge of the bed, which hadn't yet been warmed by her body heat. It was no wonder she’d had a strange dream after her strange series of conversations with Ugar. Truthfully, never taking anything for granted again was probably a little too ambitious. Humans were designed to adapt to their environment, after all, so it was only natural to consider something a given if it was always there. It wasn’t her fault that she never foresaw living a hundred years in the past. None of her original plans had included moving outside of a major city, and few out of a modern apartment. At most she’d been looking forward to having a house - newly built and full of the latest technology. That wasn’t exactly the type of life where you expected to be giving up air conditioning. There were plenty of other things to complain about - no computers, no cellphones, no Internet, no GPS. A home refrigerator was considered extravagant. No microwaves. The Dacian Army was defeated more quickly and easily than a single load of laundry. The list was practically endless, but it hadn’t bothered her so much as she’d expected for the most part, at least after a while. When it came to basic comfort, adapting was a whole other story. Kids basically fell asleep without a problem, and after she joined the Army she didn't have the luxury of being picky over the temperature. She was happy if she got a real bed. Of course, she wouldn’t go back to those days simply to avoid trouble falling asleep on a hot summer's night. She’d take a little tossing and turning over being woken up to the sound of gunfire any day. She shouldn't forget that the tranquility of her life in the past two years was also something she should be thankful for. With a huff, Tanya rolled onto her back and splayed her limbs out, a futile attempt to dispel the heat that she'd tried multiple times over the course of the past hour to no avail. Stretching out on a bed larger than the one in her own apartment, another thought occurred to her. Maybe I shouldn't take Ugar's offer for granted either. You didn’t come by chances to live rent-free every day. As far as an easy life went, it was hard to beat. On the other hand, as long as it was a standing offer, the risk of upending her routine for the unknown and giving up on the privacy of her personal life was too much for the expected reward at the present moment. Dressed up like a doll and sent to church every Sunday, babysitting in her free time, and constant questions about a subject that put unwanted thoughts in her head. How about no, was all she could say to that. Closing her eyes again and berating herself for ruminating pointlessly when she should be catching up on years of missed sleep instead, one last consideration drifted through her mind: she had a few friends in Berun. Leaving them behind would make her even more dependent on the goodwill of a single person that she was right now. Plus, when Visha returned, she’d be coming to the city. Tanya could live with only drinking her homemade coffee if she needed to, but why do that to herself for no reason? No, I definitely could never live with the Ugar family, Tanya thought to herself the next morning, after hearing an update to her schedule of events. Ugar wouldn’t hear of her spending another minute in the office. His wife was going to take her out shopping to rectify the sad state of affairs when it came to Tanya’s clothing. It would be her birthday gift from them. He insisted. The concept of dresses wasn’t one she hated in the abstract. There was nothing innately wrong with them. When it came down to it, a yukata wasn’t terribly different. Her problem had nothing to do with feeling physically uncomfortable wearing a garment that lacked an inseam, and everything to do with the social implications. The humiliation of being objectified wasn't something she was likely to forget. She didn't miss much about her days in the Army, but she wished she could still wear a uniform. If she wore the same outfit as everyone else, it made it easier to assess her on the qualities that mattered. That being said, being the center of attention was something Tanya avoided when possible. For certain occasions, she’d need a few pieces of formalwear to keep herself from standing out. So long as she rejected anything flashy, adding to her collection - if you could call a single dress that no longer fit her a collection - would only yield positive outcomes. She’d finally cleared 150 centimeters at the beginning of the spring, so the days of being constantly treated like a child because of her stature were completely in the past. She probably wouldn’t grow much taller, and unless she let herself go, she had no plans on growing substantially wider. With a few alterations, any clothes purchased now would serve her well into the future. It would save her the hassle of requesting help buying something appropriate at a later date. “You’re young!” Ugar’s wife protested, a half-hour later, objecting to the first thing Tanya had picked out. “There’s no need to dress like you’re my age!” “It feels more natural for me," she explained. With a sigh, the other woman reluctantly handed the dress off to an assistant. Gender-appropriate clothing Tanya would commit herself to needing. Age-appropriate was where she drew the line. The girl who looked to be working to spend her extra money at the club wasn’t anyone’s first choice for a middle management position. “Do you want it boxed up and sent to your apartment?” Ugar asked her a few hours later, once her ordeal was finally over and she was back to his house. “Probably safer to ship it to work,” Tanya said. “I can’t guarantee my neighbors won’t be interested in a box that size.” “I hope you’ll at least use some of it,” he joked. “Well, to start with, I’ll-,” Tanya caught herself. She’d almost said she was going to use her new bathing suit. That would have given away the plans she’d carefully concealed. “I already know which one I’ll wear for my birthday celebration.” Ugar gave a slight wince. “You’ll keep what I said in mind?” “Yes,” Tanya sighed, rubbing a thumb up her forehead. Did he think she was going to drag someone home from the bar? There was a limit to how badly someone could misunderstand her intentions. “It’s bad luck to give you your well-wishes early,” he said. “But it is nice to see you so well. I hope the trend continues.” “Me too,” Tanya replied with a smile. A few days later, when her birthday rolled around, she could definitively say that she was still on an upward path. It had been twenty years since she’d had her feet in the sand and the taste of salt on her lips. Sild’s main beach was like nothing she'd ever seen before. It stretched on for kilometers, well beyond the limit of her ability to see. The sand was white and pristine, uninterrupted save for the small beach chairs dotting the landscape. The green of the grasses behind her and the blue of the water provided a neat visual contrast. The sky had a line of thin clouds spanning its length, but they did nothing to block the light from reaching below, and held no threat of rain. A strong sun warmed the air, but a slight wind coming off the sea cooled it back to a comfortable temperature. Part of her military training had included swimming instruction, so she hadn’t been particularly afraid to wade out into the waves despite the fact that Tanya herself had never been submerged in anything more than a two-meter deep pool. The sea was bracingly chilly, even in the summer, but it was a temperature which she eventually adjusted to. After a brief morning swim, she settled herself into her chair for another day spent reading in peaceful contemplation. Prose was an altogether different sort of writing than the news reports she’d been reading the past few years. It had been an adjustment until the English - or, Albish, as it were - flowed naturally. Acquiring a fourth language with more fluency would be a smart move. Françoise still carried a certain cachet, and likely would for the remainder of her natural life. She was determined to live to see the end of that. So long as she kept herself healthy, she saw no reason she shouldn't have at least seventy more years ahead of her. Mages healed well and were less susceptible to illness than the average person, so she could even hold onto the belief that she'd be in good health for the vast majority of that time instead of creeping into old age pained and infirm the way most people did. Ahhh, she thought, taking a break from reading to watch the waves for a few minutes, I finally feel civilized again. Every employee needed a break once in a while to keep their mind healthy and productive. She snapped her gaze back to her lap when she caught her eyes tracking another swimmer making his way back in from the sea. It was rare to see another young person out so early. Apparently, she hadn’t gotten used to the sight over the past two days, so it was still noteworthy enough to draw her attention. Women’s bathing suits looked about how she’d expected, which made it all the more shocking to see that men were free to roam around in what appeared to be Speedos. Out of all the inventions to arrive early, it had to be that. Europaens were just as strange as ever. Ahh, well, on to more productive thoughts, Tanya told herself. Namely, the future of her occupation. The rule of the market was for workers to do what they were best at. For Tanya, that meant one of two things: being an aerial mage or working in an administrative role. As of today, she could count on having three more years in her current job. There would be no reason for her boss to keep her around the General Staff Office as an irregular employee once she could become an official one again. In the short-term, the officer career track was a promising one. The Imperial Army wasn’t allowed any aerial mages, so desk work was as good as guaranteed. No matter how severe an economic crisis, a government wasn’t going to stop paying its soldiers. Patriotic feelings were no substitute for an income when you had weapons at your disposal. As an added bonus, she could continue her work to influence the Army in the correct direction. It was in the long-term that being a soldier began to look problematic. She’d be a fool to think aerial mages would remain outlawed forever. The moment she was given an orb back, her relative value as an office worker plunged dramatically. She might find herself doing more fieldwork than paperwork all of a sudden. There didn’t need to be another world war for there to be conflicts of a smaller size. And in the long run, she could make more money if she wasn’t constrained by a government pay scale. When it came to being a mage, she could expect to earn a decent salary once she was old enough to use a civilian-grade orb, but not much else. By necessity, the usefulness of a mage was tied to performing specific tasks, not to knowledge work. Coming home every day physically exhausted was a part of her life she hoped would stay in the past. In theory, Tanya had no problem working her way up the ladder of private industry. It was more or less what she’d done at her job in HR. A slow method like that practically demanded a stable political and economic system. Without it, you risked getting stuck on the wrong side of the desk when layoffs started. Whether it was companies or individuals, it was common knowledge that a crisis hit those that could least afford it the worst. Logically, then, it was better to be in the ranks of those that could most afford it. A larger company had more chance of surviving than a small one. Headquarters always looked to their own office last when it came to layoffs. The managerial class protected their own at the expense of the employees lower down the hierarchy. Those were the rules. Whether they were unfair or not didn’t matter. All that mattered was being on the side that was unfairly advantaged. To that end, she’d started her original job search aiming for the top. There was no point in settling for being underpaid when you had the flexibility not to be. With the ongoing social upheaval, she hadn’t expected immediate results, but what she’d found had been discouraging. One business owner had been polite enough to tell her the truth - he believed a good job like she was looking for belonged to men with families to support. A few others had wrung their hands and given the classic excuse. “I’m not sure this is the right fit for you,” was hiring-manager code for saying you didn’t conform to unspoken or illegal standards like gender or age. The second type she’d encountered had been the doubters. Twice she’d been told outright that there was no way the stories about her were believable. The remainder had been more tactful in suggesting she was lying. A respectful bow, a thank you for her service, and a bemused mention along the lines of “I’m not sure the job matches your qualifications” or “I’m afraid I won’t be able to pay you accordingly,” coupled with a healthy dose of shock that she was even asking. But if she was willing, they would see what they could do for her. In other words, her qualifications for officework were made up or inflated, they couldn’t believe she thought so highly of herself, but out of consideration for some battlefield bravery, they’d find busy work for her to do and pay her enough not to starve. Frankly, she couldn’t blame them. Imperial propaganda had left much to be desired. After being defeated, it was more logical to conclude it had all been puffed up nonsense than anything else. As expected, there were people that believed every rumor. Including the worst ones. The “I don’t want to be associated with someone who commits atrocities” types. If possible, she didn’t want to work for socialists and communists parroting lines from foreign newspapers anyway. Potentially more concerning were the “I do want to be associated with someone who commits atrocities” types. For various reasons, it could become troublesome if her career was dependent on someone like that. When it came to the latter two categories, she doubted there was much she could do to change their minds. When it came to the former sorts, she could expect to see some improved opinions three years down the road. Women supporting families were becoming a more common fixture in the workplace, so that bias would continue to erode with time, as would the one against her young age. If the majority of people never believed her service record, that wouldn’t pose an issue once she had a few years of more traditional officework on her résumé and a boss willing to vouch for it. Lehrgen might want her to re-enlist, but he was the honest type who would give her a fair assessment nonetheless. Coupled with some choice networking designed to highlight her knowledge and skills independent of any academic credentials and she should be in a position to weather something like an economic depression without losing stride. With a happy smile, Tanya dug her toes further into the sand. Excessive optimism she’d leave for idiots, but there was no defeating someone who knew how to look for opportunity. Being X could- “Sorry to interrupt,” came a voice from the left side of her chair. She turned in time to see someone ducking lower to look at her under the canopy. Put some clothes on before you come talk to people, Tanya groused mentally. It’s rude to make people look when they don’t want to. It was the same person she’d seen getting out of the water earlier. “I was wondering if you knew anywhere good for lunch. Somewhere people like you and me might like to go?” Ah, well. It made a bit of sense if he’d found someone close to his age to ask for a recommendation instead of a retiree. Regretfully, she’d have to disappoint. “Sorry,” she said, with a shake of her head. “It’s my first time here.” “Oh. Me too. I was hoping to find something before my friends show up for the day. All they want to do is find a cheap beer hall and talk about our time in the war. It’s a little pathetic since we only caught the last two months,” he said. “Even so, there’s some good stories.” “I wouldn’t want to hang around people who only knew how to talk about that,” Tanya agreed with an emphatic shake of her head. “Especially not if you spent longer in training than anything else.” “Ah, well…” he drifted off, looking unexpectedly disappointed. She’d meant to commiserate, but she supposed she had indirectly insulted his choice in friends. He recovered momentarily, slapping a fist into a palm. “I just remembered. There was an Ildoan-style restaurant I heard is good.” She’d have to ask at her hotel where to find this place. The seafood-heavy menus of the North Sea weren’t bad, but they got repetitive. She wouldn’t mind some variety. “Have a good lunch, then,” Tanya replied, waving him off, thankful to be done with having to make sure her eyes didn’t wander towards anything they didn’t want to see. “Do you mind giving me the name of it?” “I’m sure I can remember where it is, but the name’s escaping me,” he laughed. “But I could show you if you’re interested.” “Alright,” Tanya said with a shrug, pulling a loose dress from her bag to cover with. She didn’t have anything else to accomplish, and this way she’d know where to go for dinner. “What was your name?” he asked, once he’d run back to his chair to get dressed as well. “Gretchen,” Tanya lied. If she mentioned who she was, then the conversation really would become about nothing besides war stories. “I’m Walther,” he introduced himself, leading her down a street while making some friendly conversation. A few minutes later, as promised, they arrived in front of a small shop from which the unmistakable scent of pizza was drifting out. Her stomach growled audibly as soon as she took her first breath of doughy air. How long has it been? she wondered idly. “I think I might eat lunch here after all,” Tanya murmured to herself. “We could split one to save money,” her companion suggested. Frugality was a virtue, but in this case, Tanya wasn’t interested. Today was a day for treating herself. “I have a big appetite,” she explained. Whether she used it or not, her mana eventually dissipated and had to be regenerated. Mages burned more calories resting than average people. “I’ll get one myself.” “I feel like I at least owe you a beer,” Walther offered. “The colors on your towel reminded me of their flag. If not for that, I wouldn’t have remembered I wanted to eat here.” “If you want to,” Tanya nodded with satisfaction. Normally, she wouldn’t buy herself a beer over lunch. If someone else wanted to because they thought they owed her a favor, that was a different story. “Great,” he smiled. “You know, I wish I wasn’t leaving tomorrow.” She could sympathize with the feeling. That aside, she was a working adult. Vacation would lose its allure if she spent all her time relaxing. “Me too,” Tanya sighed, pointing at the beer she wanted. “But if we’re lucky, we’ll do this again next year. It’s better to have something to look forward to.” “Yeah!” Walther agreed. Tanya smiled. Everyone needed the occasional reminder that all play and no work would be more dull than the other way around. “Well, I think I’m going to run to the bathroom and then head back to the beach,” she said, a half-hour later, once she was finished with food and drink. “Have fun with your friends.” “Ahh, right,” he replied. When she came back to pay, she noticed something scrawled on a scrap of paper. “Your friend covered it,” the bartender told her with a smile. “Did he leave that?” Tanya looked down. It was an address and number for a local hotel. Walther was going with a classic - leaving his number for the bartender. Tanya looked back up at the woman on the other side of the counter. Jet black hair, healthily tanned, intense gaze, big smile, bigger hips. She could have been on an advertisement for a Mediterranean holiday. A man could do worse. “Have fun with him,” Tanya said with a smile, pushing the napkin to the other woman. Ahh, she thought, walking out of the place. The springtime of youth.     




 

 The Second Coming






 
 "Friendship is far more tragic than love. It lasts longer."
 
 August 12, 1930General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 There were always silver linings. To the end of the war as much as to anything else. Where before, every law, every custom, every convention that underpinned the accepted order had to be challenged and revised by ones and twos, never threes or fours, the mores and sensibilities of the past most at odds with progress had been shed all at once, like an old skin, to leave more room for everyone to make of life what they would. Rapid technological advances abounded. New frontiers had opened in fields ranging from automation to zeppelin design. For all its misfortunes, the Empire remained on the forefront of scientific innovation, its universities and institutions still turning out new designs and developments aplenty. The last holdout of Europa’s powers clinging to true monarchy now had arguably the most democratic structure of all. So democratic it could be difficult to accomplish much, but a pendulum pulled too far in one direction naturally swung too far in the opposite at the first chance. In time, it would settle into a rhythm, so long as the system was kept stable. That, at least, was what Erich von Lehrgen would like to believe each time he left work past seven to go home and do more work with different scenery surrounding him. Much of the burden of managing external threats to stability fell to the Army. As far as internal ones went, he’d leave it to the politicians he voted for. He doubted if Tanya had enough desire to be ladylike to classify what he’d noticed a minute before as a silver lining. In the midst of demonstrating to him a particularly strange handshake technique someone had employed on her recently after they’d been side-tracked onto the subject of bad handshakes in the abstract, she’d inadvertently demonstrated a noteworthy physical change in herself - her hands were soft. They were no longer the callused, wind-chapped pair he’d first shaken when he’d given her the orders to climb aboard a prototype rocket. As abnormal as he’d then considered her, an abrupt pang of bizarreness had blitzed through him upon registering that a child’s hand was more worn than his own. Realizing that same handful of auspicious outcomes hadn’t been contingent on losing the war. Social upheaval and technological breakthroughs would have followed regardless, and at less cost. Tanya would have had fewer battles to keep her hands optimized for holding weapons. Had they won, they may have had it all on top of what the Army had hoped for: the dream of an Empire not bounded by potentially hostile nations on all sides. An undisputed strength that would put them on more equal footing with the countries that had an ocean on one or more frontiers, who were free to use smaller, more concentrated forces for local defense and send the rest off to secure a better economic position, either abroad in the form of colonies or at home in the form of laborers contributing to valuable industries. There was one benefit which belonged unequivocally to the sorry aftermath. After a generation spent ignoring it, Europa had been forced to resume the normal diplomatic efforts which had defined the previous hundred years of history by virtue of recognizing the cost of blatant disregard. The age-old alliance between the Republic and the Tsardom had been torn apart when the latter became the Federation. That had dealt a deadly blow to the balance, the Empire’s two greatest threats no longer standing united against it. Instead of stepping in to devise a new method of containment, the Commonwealth had thought it could watch from the sidelines while its competition headed towards mutual suicide. The Unified States had never before taken much interest in what happened across the ocean. Collective neglect had given the Empire space to forego traditional compromises as it consolidated power. It was strange when he thought about it, that the Empire he remembered from his childhood was simultaneously more belligerent and more tactful than the one he’d known as an officer. They hadn’t courted war with any of the major powers once their borders had become more or less fixed. Neither had they taken any pains to appease them. Had the Imperial side won, they’d have had next to no need for peaceful methods to subjugate any challengers. With unrivaled military might as the hammer, war and more war as the solution to the slightest dispute may have become the proverbial nail. His career in helping to forge that hammer had been a happy marriage of duty and personal preference. The officer corps was the final destination of countless other second sons of privileged birth, whether they liked it or not. Those who didn’t languished as eternal first lieutenants angling for a placement in the more prestigious regiments. Some might make captain or major by the time their career finished. Those with more ambition competed along with the rest, in a contest that grew fairer by the decade, for promotions into the heart of the Imperial Army. By now, any explicit bias towards noble names had been wiped from the governing regulations. Implicit bias took more time to erase, but just as surely it was moving into the realm of history. Long before he’d donned an official uniform, Erich, who was all he’d been back then, hadn’t doubted that his predetermined occupation was the one he’d choose regardless. A place to put into practice all the knowledge devoured from books, a place to help transform their country from a newcomer to a first-rate world power, a place that represented a life in less stultified confines than the distant countryside. He’d been young, then. Not stupid, but young. Too young to readily grasp that a familiar pattern couldn’t go on forever. That the small, contained scuffles he read about in the papers and heard discussed over dinner, each another win for the Empire, would soon come to a natural end, that all that would be left was a nation committed to keeping what it had. At first, it hadn’t been a bad substitute. Better, even. Less chance for individual glory, perhaps, but that wasn’t what he’d been chasing. New problems, and along with them plans that were at once grander and more delicate than their forebears. Their fatal mistake hadn’t been in the brilliance of their plans nor in their flawless execution. It had been in what they hadn’t planned, in what no one save one person had seen coming - that jumping headlong at the chance to do more than rival the other powers and to stand indisputably above them would inevitably curse every victory to push new opponents into the field. What any of them wouldn’t give now to have kept what they had. Force of arms was an integral part of any nation’s repertoire for achieving its goals. If Lehrgen didn’t believe that anymore, he would have taken his leave of the Army after the war. A war which had proven that using it as the singular, or even primary, means came with more consequences than it had in the past. And only in a corrupted hell of a world would it become an end unto itself. Still, his part of it - the Army’s part of it - couldn’t be forgotten. A country unwilling or unable to defend its own borders was only a country by the grace of the countries both able and willing to do so in its stead. Thousands of kilometers of land borders with few natural defenses, and the Empire’s two longest were with its two least-friendly neighbors. One day or another, they would be called upon to put up a respectable defense. Or at least threaten to do so. Desperately, in halting, sometimes secretive steps, they were rebuilding their capacity to do more than roll over and beg for help when faced with their next invasion of significance. He’d never been content applying solely as much effort as was required and no more, yet the tasks before them demanded more than he'd ever imagined giving. He’d signed on for a consistently challenging job to be handed a frequently impossible one. His moments of wondering whether he’d have chosen differently if he’d known what the future held were becoming fewer and further between as he grew into responsibilities thrust upon him too early and with each step the North Germanian Empire took towards integrating itself back into the world. One of which was a badly-needed resumption of diplomacy efforts. Lehrgen listened with itinerant interest to the end of Tanya’s account of her run-in with an acquaintance - the former Sergeant Schöne, if he’d heard her correctly - and his enthusiastically incorrect handshake. It was hard to tell beneath her stern disposition that her mood was good, cheery if he was being optimistic, the same way it had been ever since she’d returned from vacation. In the past nine months, he’d gleaned enough from her to know that if she’d come to the point of relaying a story about herself, short and topical as it was, she was more content than he’d seen her since the war ended. Happier, perhaps not. Not in the way that made her eyes gleam with devilish malice. But satisfied enough not to do anything rash. He couldn’t think of a better time, one where she would be more receptive to the message of moderation that so often went unheard. She might, for once, have an opinion on international politics that he was willing to hear out, and be willing to consider his in turn. If nothing more, it was a time where doing something other than rolling his eyes and moving along might have a positive effect. “You’ll see the news in the papers by the end of the week, I expect,” Lehrgen began, once she’d finished, “but I don’t mind telling you in advance. A few of the other powers have agreed to some high-level talks.” “We got them to do that?” Tanya asked, mouth hanging part way open in disbelief. “Not us,” he said, with a shake of his head. “The Americans. They were hoping for an open forum to settle international grievances, apparently. I’m not convinced they’ve grasped there’s a difference between horse-trading over some distant colonial territory and doing it with land that’s been in dispute between the same people for centuries. Anyway, they’ve at least managed to get a discussion going.” “Any word on what, exactly, is being discussed?” “Nothing specific. No repealing any provisions of the treaty, if that’s what you’re asking. At least not for now. Just regular, monthly meetings to reduce the chance we go through periodic cycles of bleeding the continent dry entirely on accident. Not that anyone’s capable of waging another on that scale so soon,” he said, giving a shrug. “But it would be a betrayal of duty to assume that will never be the case.” “That’s…” Tanya started to say, before she paused and raised a finger. Silently, she mouthed a few words to herself. Her eyes blinked rapidly as they stared blankly ahead up until they began to dart around in desperate search of some unknown answer. When they eventually found his own, they were concealing tears. He would swear to it. “T-Degurechaff?” he asked, startled by the suddenness of her mood shift. She cleared her throat. Once. Twice. “That’s - umm - yeah,” she said, voice strained. “That’s good to know. No more accidental world wars.” Her unfocused response finished with her clasping her hands together in front of her mouth, tight enough that he could see nails digging into skin. One deep breath later, the tension in her palms eased slightly, only to be replaced by a bouncing leg caught in the attention of his peripheral vision. There was no mistaking it for anything other than the onset of panic. “Would you like to go back to your office until you’ve come to terms with the possible future?” he asked. On one level, the blatant honesty of her reaction was refreshing. That notwithstanding, the last time she’d become over-agitated by a superior telling her the war was on an indefinite hold, an intervention by the military police had been required. “If...if you don’t mind giving me a moment, sir,” she said, head bent in apology. He gestured towards the hall. She shot up from her seat, forgetting to close the door behind her when she made her way out. A polite way to exit was what he would have offered any other soldier needing a minute to regain their composure. Still, a part of him felt wrong not trying to help the scared, confused girl that had temporarily taken the place of the stalwart, self-assured officer. It was her own fault she took what he said so badly, not his. Still, a part of him felt guilty not having anticipated it given what he knew about her predilections. He organized his papers as a distraction, from that and from the glaring reminder of why she needed eyes kept on her. Underneath the pseudo-contentment he’d seen recently dwelt the same Degurechaff as ever. The one who awaited the day her hands would be reshaped to fit the stock and trigger of a gun. More often than not, the quiet and determined worker put an innocuous façade over the part of her that couldn’t bear to imagine a future devoid of enemies on all sides. He didn’t know what she’d said to Ugar. He didn’t know if he wanted to know after Ugar’s letter to him full of regret that she wasn’t ready to turn away from her ardent pursuit and pity that Lehrgen was the one that had to bear the brunt of it. Whatever it was, it meant that she was unwilling to consider other jobs so long as her favorite one was open to her. He could fire her. Best case scenario, she kept her head down and returned three years later in open rivalry to him. At this point, he had the clout to alter the career of almost anyone he took issue with. Except her, with her military acumen beloved of the two people directly above him in the chain of command, along with the former General von Zettour, who was not to be considered powerless by any means. His chosen distraction turned out to be fleeting. For the most part, his papers were already in order. “Get out that bottle of brandy you keep in your bottom drawer,” he instructed his adjutant a minute later, after dragging an open chair over to Ernst’s desk and dropping into it. “Umm, sir, I don’t know what you’re-,” “I know you have it and I’m not opening one of my bottles of wine. So…” Lehrgen flicked his hand twice in a beckoning motion. “What’s the occasion?” Ernst asked, drawing the bottle out. Lehrgen glanced around the room of lower-ranking officers to make sure no one was paying particular attention and found heads bent to papers. He took a swig from the bottle. “Christ,” he cursed, trying to keep his voice low, the unpleasant acridity of cheap liquor on his tongue. “Can’t you buy something better?” “Some of us are on a lieutenant’s salary and don’t have families sending an allowance,” Ernst shot back, mimicking Lehrgen’s quiet undertone in spite of the friendly sarcasm. “I did not get an allowance,” Lehrgen replied, near to forgetting his circumspect care not to attract attention so he could plunk the bottle down on Ernst’s desk in emphasis. “Right. Just a house.” “What was I going to do?” Lehrgen protested. “Not live in it?” “Just saying,” Ernst said, mouth quirking up into a half-smile while he relaxed back into his chair, bringing up an ankle to cross over a knee. “So, what’d Degurechaff do this time?” “How’d you-,” “It’s two-thirty. Your meetings never end early and you came out of this one wanting a drink. One can only assume.” “You know,” Lehrgen said, taking another swig and then screwing the cap on and pushing the bottle across the table, back towards Ernst, so he wasn’t tempted, “I think I made her cry.” “So is this a celebratory drink, or-,” “No. No. It is not. I am not proud of it,” he huffed, throwing his hands out to the sides instead of up where they might catch someone’s eye. His own composure felt as though it was on the verge of disappearing for the remainder of the day. “I mean, who would be proud of making some kid cry? Even if she is more than a little messed up?” “Not really a kid anymore, sir,” Ernst laughed. “But sure. What’d you do?” “Oh, you know. Told her the other powers were making an effort to avoid another conflict growing to catastrophic proportions. What else?” With a wry smile, Ernst unscrewed the bottle still on his desk and took a swig himself before putting it away. “As soon as I said it, it was like the world had ended,” Lehrgen explained, opening his arms as wide as they went, no longer concerned that his gesticulation would attract unwanted notice to daytime indulgences. “Have you ever seen someone’s eyes when you can tell they’re imagining their future going up in smoke? What if all I made her do is realize she needs to try harder?” “There’s nothing you could have done about it. She would have read it in the news by the end of the week.” “I was ready for her to start speculating how we can play everyone off against each other to win in the future by knocking them out one by one, or something,” Lehrgen sighed, fishing a cigarette out of the crumpled box in his pocket. “She has a sort of invincible spirit when it comes to using whatever she’s got to her advantage. Who would believe the prospect of not taking on everyone at once again would be so abhorrent it would reduce her to tears?” “I can think of a few,” Ernst shrugged. “Everyone who saw her skip around with a smile on her face after hearing we were being invaded by a third enemy probably wouldn’t have a hard time believing she’d react the opposite of how a normal person would.” “I guess I should’ve known,” Lehrgen said, with a self-mocking chuckle. “Anyway, I’ll get back to work. What’s my three o’clock?” “Cancelled a few minutes before you came by.” Ye-es, Lehrgen thought, the news a needed bright spot to his day. For having a last name like Sauer, Ernst had an ironic propensity for bringing good cheer. xXx Calm down, Tanya repeated to herself, pacing in front of her desk and wiping at eyes that stubbornly insisted on trying to ease her anxiety in the least professional way possible. You’re jumping to conclusions before you have all the facts. Extremely improbable conclusions. Intrusive thoughts belonged in the back of the mind for later, not at the forefront where they distracted her from doing the work that was expected of her. When she was at the office, she was an employee before she was anything else. What she was facing was the very definition of a black swan event. Before she could make a thoughtful comment on those regular, monthly meetings to stop periodic bloodletting between diplomats her boss had mentioned, she needed to put some thought into a regular, monthly occurrence involving periodic bloodletting of her own. Or, more specifically, the lack thereof. She had herself and herself only to blame for a few things. First and foremost, for the pathetic lack of self-control exerted over her involuntary reaction to imagining a scenario could exist in which she became something more terror-inducing than a soldier stuck in an endless war - a single teen mother. Secondly, assuming that physiology was exactly the same as what she knew from her old life was on her. Yes, this world had magic, but she still had ten fingers and ten toes, all her senses worked in the usual way, every biological process functioned as she remembered. A human was a human was a human. She may have been somewhat lax in her attention to detail and missed an all-important deviation as a result. The problem with a mostly-familiar environment was that it had the potential to lull you into a false sense of security. To put it succinctly, the decision not to read the procedures because you switched to the same job at a different company was the first step on the road to receiving a formal write-up. Failing to verify that the terms of entering the parenthood marketplace were the same as she remembered down to the minute details was an elementary-level mistake. Not only did magic exist in this world, Tanya had the ability to use it. There was no saying what minor changes that caused to the normal operating procedure of the human body. She’d never heard of anyone doing magic in their sleep, but she couldn’t rule that a dream could have consequences. Mages altered reality with their will. Theoretically, the unconscious should be able to construct an interference formula. It sounded entirely illogical to think that something like touching the opposite gender barehanded without a counteracting formula could have adverse effects. Then again, if Being X had anything to do with mana, the system being free from logical errors would be as miraculous as a student with a semester of computer science coding a complex program flawlessly. Come to think of it, Visha had once hinted at wanting to explain “how things worked,” after Tanya had turned fourteen. The arrogance of assuming she’d known more than her former adjutant. The arrogance. Putting all that aside, no one could blame her for having a legitimate fear of improbable events. Being X had a bad history of messing with her life specifically, and, if his book was to be trusted, she wouldn’t be the first person he’d done this to. War wasn’t a singular way of derailing her life’s plans. New and unimproved options had opened up a few months ago. If Being X wanted a new way to play around with her free will now that the Type 95 was gone, this method was a sure winner. You couldn’t take someone who didn’t care about the difference between brainwashing and convincing and expect them to understand the concept of stooping too low. All of his worshipers celebrated the claim that he’d dropped this responsibility on an unsuspecting teenager in the past. Not that she believed it, but there was no chance he was above plagiarizing a bad idea. Anyway, it’s possible those idiotic rumors I heard about pools or toilet seats in middle school were true, she thought, chewing at a thumbnail. They’d sounded spurious to a person as undereducated on such matters as a thirteen-year-old boy. Foolishly, she hadn’t gone out of her way to make absolutely sure they were false, as it hadn’t seemed applicable at the time. Tanya took a deep breath, clenched and unclenched her fists a few times, and made herself sit down. She stared at the phone for half a minute, mentally making note of the oil smudge from her hand, the light coating of dust on the right side of the base, any small details she could make out, a handy trick she’d learned to focus her attention outside her head. Once she was sure she wouldn’t embarrass herself when she opened her mouth, she took another deep breath and picked up the phone. The person she was going to call had to be the worst first resort for this line of inquiry imaginable. “St. Mary’s Children’s Home,” she chewed out to the operator. “Hello?” a familiar voice greeted. “Erna,” Tanya said, exhaling audibly. Having to deal with Sister Martha at this juncture would have been a trial. “Good. I wanted to talk to you.” “You sound like something’s wrong.” “Listen, this is a weird question, but…” Tanya let the air rush out of her lungs and pinched the bridge of her nose. Weird didn’t begin to cover asking a nun for this sort of information. Depending on what Erna had been taught, she might not be familiar with the most basic of clinical terms. As had been the case since she’d been reborn as Tanya, her choices were limited. More than becoming a temporary item of office gossip, if she went to ask one of the typists, she’d earn a reputation she’d never live down. “...do you know where babies come from?” The other end of the line was silent for a second. Shortly after, the tinkle of laughter trickled through. “I’m serious.” “Sorry,” Erna sniggered. “Sorry, of course I do.” Great, Tanya groaned with relief, resting her head in a hand. Her backup option had been Lieutenant Sauer, of all people. If nothing else, for a shot of that brandy she’d seen him stuff in his drawer once. Besides that, he came off as just irresponsible enough to have put some girl into this position and not irresponsible enough to have ignored it. Out of everyone, he might know what to do and how to keep quiet about it. “Well, you’re a nun, so-,” “I’m a nun, not a hermit,” Erna replied, with a final breath of laughter. “I’m nineteen. Of all the things you know, I can’t believe this in the one-,” “I do know. I just want to make sure of the details. Explain it. Don’t leave anything out.” Truthfully, the idea of being a father had always held some allure as a theoretical imagination. The world needed more people like her instilling values in the next generation. A family was presented as part and parcel of a rounded-out life. Anyone with half a brain could tell you that was a myth. Someone claiming that children were a magical key to happiness was probably trying to justify why they’d only gotten three hours of sleep the night before. It was the same people that said falling in love was necessary for a fulfilling life while sobbing about their last breakup. A fulfilling life was what you made it. In spite of all that, the irrational part of her brain distorted by evolutionary necessity had persisted in holding onto the idea of fatherhood as a desirable goal. More so than having a romantic partner, though it was complicated to have the former without the latter. Fortunately, the rational part of her brain took precedence when it counted. If she could sum up what she’d seen of the practical side of raising children in a few words, they would be expensive, time-consuming, and chaotic. The best part of it all was that the work came with no promise of reward. There were more ways for children not to live up to your expectations than ways for them to succeed. And that was fatherhood. Motherhood came with the additional joys of first discomfort, then pain, then a permanently altered physiology. Even in modern times, it didn’t come without career sacrifices. If you didn’t make them, your qualifications for being a mother would be questioned to your face, and worse said behind your back. She wasn’t a bad mage, but waving a wand and eliminating all those problems was at best a pipe dream. She was happy to leave it at saying that it wasn’t her cup of tea. Tanya listened as intently as her mind would allow her to Erna’s explanation, which so far matched what she already knew, crossing and uncrossing her legs every few seconds. She hadn’t been feeling nauseous unless she counted the last five minutes. She had put on some weight over the course of the past few months. At the time, progressing from scrawny to slender had seemed healthy. True, when she’d looked in the mirror the other day she’d noticed her stomach sloped slightly outwards as it reached her navel. She’d written that off as normal for anyone not constantly pushing the limits of physical exertion. No, don’t you hear stories about people who didn’t know until it was way too late? she asked herself. In that case, she couldn’t take any lack of obvious signs as negative proof. And speaking of obvious signs, the single most obvious one was very much present. Aside from reasons of general health, she hadn’t wanted to grow into a woman or whatever. Having the capacity for reproduction was somewhere on the scale between annoying and completely useless. But putting it bluntly, now that her body had indicated it was going to bleed every month, wasn’t the one thing worse than it doing that...it not doing that? Her diet was normal. In fact, it was probably better than the average thanks to a steady income and knowledge gleaned from the future about what counted as a nutritious meal. She exercised regularly, but not excessively. Besides right now, her stress levels had been normal to low. Even so, outside of extremes, could any of that cause...she paused to count silently to herself and make sure she had it right...almost four months with nothing? For a healthy person, is there any other explanation? She’d never heard of one. Women wouldn’t get so worried about missing or late periods if they were normal. If it would go ahead and come back, she wouldn’t let a complaint pass her lips ever again. Hurray for womanhood. It was embarrassing it had taken her so long to notice a key indicator of her well-being was off. Luckily for her, Erna wouldn’t be crossing paths with Tanya’s coworkers anytime soon. Excellent self-management was a foundational skill for anyone hoping to manage others. Demonstrably failing in such a flagrant manner wasn’t going to be inspiring any trust in her abilities. In her defense, she’d never claimed to be an ancient oracle. The rationally-minded only made predictions after collecting sufficient observations to establish an accurate pattern. Using a calendar to plan out exactly when she needed to be prepared couldn’t come until after the data-gathering phase, so naturally, an unpleasant fact had slipped her mind in the absence of anything to prompt a reminder. Her boss had the unfortunate luck to be the trigger and thus the witness to her bout of panic. Tanya nodded to herself while Erna finished her explanation. All the specifics checked out so far. “There’s no difference for mages?” she verified, buffing at a small stain she’d noticed in the wood of her desk. “I don’t think so,” Erna replied. “Except I’ve heard you all can use a sort of preventative spell. I know mostly because the church doesn’t approve.” Of course they don’t, Tanya muttered to herself. As if she needed any more evidence that religion was the enemy of progress. She couldn’t rule out a prank by Being X yet. Only a doctor could tell her if it was that or an unknown malady plaguing her. All the same, it was a relief to hear she bore no personal responsibility due to lack of oversight. “Okay. Thanks. That’s what I thought. I just needed to make sure,” Tanya said, hunting around for another coffee ring she could attempt to clean off. “One more thing. How can the doctor actually tell?” Erna didn’t answer immediately, so she was treated to another couple seconds of silence. The question must have been outside the other girl’s range of expertise. Tanya was stumped herself. Without the conveniences of modern medical science it seemed likely to involve an irritating amount of crude guesswork. “What’s your address?” Erna asked. Her tone was firm enough Tanya could mistake her for a lieutenant general. “I’m coming with you. I can be there in two hours-,” “No, that’s-,” “I get it, so you don’t have to pretend. I’m not going to leave you alone whatever you decide. Do you know how far along you are? Do you...you at least know who the father is, right?” Tanya had to keep from screeching in protest. What sort of questionable lifestyle are you implying I lead? she shouted to herself. Erna getting the wrong idea on some level was excusable. Young love, curiosity, a handsome face at the beach. They happened. She had done nothing to deserve the accusation of being so reckless she couldn’t keep track of partners and dates. She had a proper job. Not one that required a side income. “It’s not like that,” Tanya said sharply, chomping down on the thumbnail she’d been worrying at earlier. “I didn’t - umm - I haven’t ever...but I haven’t bled again, so I don’t know what else-,” “You shouldn’t scare people like that,” Erna snapped back, taking a few deep breaths. “Was that all?” “Yes, but doesn’t that usually mean-,” “It’s normal. Or, it’s at least not that unusual. For the first year or so, it can be a bit random for some girls. After that, yes.” “Even if it’s this long?” she asked. She knew better than to take the first explanation offered for no other reason than that she liked how it sounded. She hadn’t been expecting an exact thirty-day interval. On account of being off to a slow start on the development front, she would have been willing to consider a variation of two or three weeks as falling within the acceptable range of standard deviation. But this wasn’t an unreliable soldier running in late to roll-call. It was a rogue one who’d gone MIA for several consecutive check-ins. “It’s almost four months if you don’t recall.” “Trust me, I remember it’s been another four months that I haven’t heard from you except for an emergency,” Erna retorted. “It is a bit long, but I wouldn’t worry about it. You can go to the doctor if you want, but...well, for me, it got towards three months once, so I wouldn’t get worked up as long as you’re sure…” “I am.” “Okay. Then, you should be fine. Make sure you keep some things with you all the time until it’s predictable.” “You couldn’t have mentioned this earlier?” Tanya asked, fighting off the urge to cry again, this time purely from relief. “And who was the one that said ‘I know how it goes?’ when I tried, hmm?” Forcing someone to eat their words in circumstances as cruel as a pregnancy scare wasn’t behavior fitting of a woman of God. Admittedly, that bumped her opinion of Erna up a notch. Did they forget to teach us this part in school? Tanya wondered, idly picking a pen up off her desk and giving it a twirl. The giddy sensation that came along with stress melting away all at once gave her more energy than a dozen cups of coffee could have. No, maybe they did and I didn’t pay close enough attention then forgot it. It was a minor failure. No one sane would accuse a middle-school boy of fault for skimming over that type of information. “I knew the basics,” Tanya grudgingly confessed. “I guess I won’t hear from you again until there’s another emergency,” Erna said, the gentle reproval belying the easy laughter of her tone. “It’s not like we can grab a drink at the bar after work,” Tanya pointed out. “Did you miss the water into wine part?” “I never saw the sisters drinking.” “We don’t do it in front of the children,” Erna laughed, louder this time. “Overindulgence is frowned upon. Deeply. I can have a beer or a glass of wine every now and then. Although I would feel strange sitting at a bar in my habit.” “Well, you can come by sometime if you’re extra bored,” she conceded. “Call the Staff Office switchboard and ask for me before you do.” “Extra bored?” “If I said a little bored, that would mean all the time,” Tanya huffed. At a certain age, you had to be held responsible for your choices. She had better things to do than serve as a constant escape from the drudgery Erna had opted into. “Then I’ll come by one day,” Erna said, after a noisy sigh of exasperation. “And did you get the birthday present I sent?” “Yes…” Tanya replied hesitantly, to the implication that Erna herself had sent the package of homemade honey. It had come labeled “From all your friends at St. Mary’s”. She might not have been ready to debut into high society, but she could differentiate between a personal gift and institutional acknowledgement. Only one required a thank-you card. A written expression of gratitude for the corporate holiday token would end up in the trash of a confused admin. “I guess mine must be lost in the mail,” Erna commented. “They’re so slow getting things out here these days.” Dammit, Tanya cursed. Erna’s birthday was two weeks after hers. For someone who had taken a vow of poverty, she was awfully preoccupied by worldly matters. In search of a good response, Tanya found herself tracing the lines of the coffered ceiling above her. As might be expected, she didn’t find any answers hiding among the ceiling panels. The two cobwebs she found instead were poor substitutes. Yesterday, she’d noticed another sign that there was a cleaner cutting corners out there, like they didn’t realize there were a hundred unemployed people waiting to fill the position. The brass on the feet of her lamp was beginning to tarnish. ...Socks? drifted through her head at the thought. If memory served, Erna had collected patterned socks with the avidity of a nonconformist magpie. As an added bonus, they weren’t expensive. “It’s coming,” Tanya grumbled. “And thanks for everything. I didn’t know who else I could call.” “Next time, call for something pleasant, okay?” “Yeah,” Tanya promised. With that, she hung up the phone, glad to be finished with the subject. Now she had to turn her attention to the next task - making amends with her boss for an inexplicable breach of professional decorum. She took a second to compose herself and then walked down the hall. “Come get me when General von Lehrgen’s meeting is over,” she ordered Lieutenant Sauer. “It got cancelled,” he said. “He’s not with anyone now. But…” Tanya tapped her foot impatiently, waiting for him to continue. Instead, she was treated to a display of theatrical vacillation that she hadn’t purchased tickets for. “But…?” she prompted. Sauer hummed, eyes glancing around guiltily, then drummed his fingers on his desk a few times. “I’m not sure I should say anything,” he demurred, half in a whisper. All he was missing was a long piece of hair to twirl. Evidently, Tanya wasn’t the only reincarnate born into opposite circumstances. She had to wonder what the queen bee of teenaged drama had done to offend Being X so badly. Maybe mentioned that his outfit was so third century. “Sauer, one of us should be in high school, and it isn’t you.” The visible wince he gave was satisfying. “All I was going to say is I’m not sure he wants to see you right now. He’ll never say it, but I think he’s a bit...disappointed.” “D-Disappointed?” Tanya confirmed, so close to not believing her ears she was unable to prevent herself from stuttering the word out. When it came to giving out feedback, it was a term she was overly familiar with using, sometimes at the expense of less collegial but more colorful vocabulary. When it came to receiving feedback, in all her years in the workforce, she had never once heard it launched in her direction. Quickly, she schooled her annoyance behind a mask of professionalism. Lehrgen hadn’t reacted well when she’d let a few tears out at the state funeral after the war. High achievers were held to high expectations. It was a compliment. The measure of a manager was whether they recognized and worked against their cognitive bias, not whether they had it at all. “Say what’s on your mind,” she said, when she noticed Sauer looking ambivalent about continuing. “Look, Degurechaff, you’re smart, so think on it for a second, okay? At nothing more than the mention that there’s a low probability of you ever being involved in another world war again, you’re upset. What are people going to think about where your loyalties lie?” How could she forget? When it came to a culture that valued patriotic sacrifice, admitting to abject cowardice - or, as a rational person might put it, recognizing the value of your own life - was worse than openly advocating mass murder. As long as the ones being murdered were enemies, of course. From Lehrgen’s perspective, she’d lost it when he’d very reasonably posited that they couldn’t assume there would never be another world war simply because everyone was tired of them at the moment. It was as good as saying she’d let their country be conquered by anyone who wanted to try. “Not a proper sentiment for an officer,” she nodded, in confirmation that she understood what Sauer was getting at. “Or a citizen generally, really. It’s everyone’s future that’s at stake. Not just yours.” She wouldn’t dream of denying such a universally obvious statement. At every time and every place, everyone’s future was at stake. The task of caring about that future was up to each individual. She wasn’t responsible for anyone else’s. Still no respect for rational self-interest, is there? she sighed to herself. “As a thanks for the heads up, I’ll ignore the accusatory tone,” she replied, then watched him wince again. “I’m as prepared to do what’s necessary for my country as you are.” She marched towards Lehrgen’s door, gathering her thoughts along the way. He’d shown some flexibility in the past when it came to matters in the same vein. There was no way to pretend he hadn’t caught on. Like any good PR firm doing a cover-up, the strategy was apologize and minimize with a side of deflect and redirect. After that, no need to worry that everyone he knew would soon hear that she was no longer reliable in a pinch. She stepped into his office after a knock. “All sorted out?” he asked. “Or do I need to take responsibility for ruining your year?” Tanya gave a cough to conceal the laugh that wanted to escape. If she told him the real reason she’d run out of his office, he wouldn’t make a generous offer like that so lightly. “I wanted to apologize for my behavior,” she said when she looked up. “It was momentary shock over being reminded of a personal matter that had slipped my mind. Nothing more. It won’t happen again.” “It…” he paused to give a long sigh, then gestured at the chair opposite him. She took her place in front of his desk. “It wasn’t a flattering reaction, to be sure. But one I should have seen coming, given how well the last war went for you.” “What soldier doesn’t dream of permanent frontline duty?” she asked, repaying his sarcasm in kind. The most war-happy of her subordinates had nevertheless enjoyed time away now and then. “Anyhow, it doesn’t change much of anything at this point,” he said, magnanimously waving away her blunder. “Was there something else?” The first half of the plan had gone smoothly. Her apology had been accepted and the error effectively downplayed. Now came the second half: a convenient distraction to focus attention elsewhere. The last impression you left on someone could be as important as the first. Finishing the day by apologizing for your incompetence? A great move as long as you intended to leave everyone remembering how incompetent you were. “There was one thing I wanted to bring up after I gave it some thought,” she said. “In regards to the general appetite for total war being low.” With the Army not taking any posture besides a defensive one, the country ran more of a risk being too accommodating than too aggressive. She might not want the Empire to start another world war, but until she either repaired her international reputation or acquired enough means to pay people to ignore it so she could emigrate, nothing would be worse for her personally than losing a second one. For her money, she’d lay her chips on the Republic being the most likely of their neighbors to fall victim to a demagogue promising glory. From purely a military perspective, they’d achieved their objective - preventing the Empire from growing too powerful to be contained. She wouldn’t want to be the one selling that line to the general public an occupation, a ruined economy, and no territorial gains later. They’d even flirted with a military dictatorship under de Lugo for a time. All that aside, this wasn’t a warning she’d give to someone whose judgement she didn’t trust. In the wrong hands, it could be used as a blueprint for their own country to follow. “I’m listening,” Lehrgen said. “If everyone’s set on keeping out of a major war, comparatively minor conflicts may be avoided in the name of peace,” she explained. “It’s a system that favors the aggressor up to a point.” The appalled look her boss gave her was proof that she’d put her faith in the right person. Such a duplicitous plan wouldn’t cross the mind of someone with old-fashioned military sensibilities involving honor and righteous glory. “The Army’s leadership wouldn’t advise our politicians on that being a wise course of action,” he replied firmly. “Speaking in hypotheticals,” Tanya said hastily. She might earn some points for optimistic patriotism, but that wasn’t worth suggesting an overtly hostile path for her country to go down. This was the time for a reminder that taken too far, it would end in another unwinnable fiasco. “Only pointing out that if desired, the aggressor could maneuver themselves into a superficially favorable position for a large-scale conflict while everyone else is busy trying to avoid it.” “I should like to think we’ll be reasonably capable of defending our own borders again someday soon, but even at our best we couldn’t conquer all our neighbors. Does that not serve to warn anyone else away from trying?” “There were plenty of errors made along the way. For one, not having a plan in place to conquer all of our neighbors. Or any of them.” “Still…” Lehrgen sighed, shaking his head. “It could just as easily have gone worse. Had all our enemies committed at once, we wouldn’t have done half so well.” Tanya gave a one-shoulder shrug of acknowledgement. As two logical individuals, it was a matter of course that she and her boss would see it the same. She’d learned the hard way not to assume that everyone else could be counted on to have their sanity intact. “Since we’re speaking hypothetically, couldn’t an ambitious field commander provide the final push? Even if the political will wasn’t ultimately there for sparking that large-scale conflict?” Lehrgen asked, his eyes narrowing at the thought. There were times when it was impossible not to break into a smile. This happened to be one. Discussing problems with other great minds who could put a new perspective on things was one of the pleasures of being human. Based on what she knew of history, Tanya was naturally more suspicious of belligerent politicians who wanted to make good on the more reprehensible of their promises. Unless you got stuck with a real fanatic leading the country, more likely than not a politician shrewd enough to make it to the top would prioritize his own life over anyone else’s. Cut a deal with your supposed enemies, sell out, then blame the rival parties for undercutting you. The standard formula for success. Except for when a fanatical follower was only a border incident away from triggering that war you never really intended to start in the first place. “You catch on quickly, sir,” Tanya nodded, with a sheepish smile at not having thought of it herself. Just knowing her leadership wouldn’t put any loose cannons in charge of tense situations would help her sleep better at night. He cleared his throat. “Well, thanks for bringing this to my attention. I’ll make sure the right people are aware.” “I’m glad I could be helpful,” she smiled, taking that as her cue to leave. Maybe I have a future as a PR agent, she thought, mentally patting herself on the back as she stood up. She’d pay to see someone else pull off a reversal as smoothly as she had. “Degurechaff,” Lehrgen waved, motioning for her to sit back down. “While we’re on the topic of the future, I’d like to discuss yours for a moment.” She dropped back into her seat. “With no disrespect meant to your talents as a mage, I think you do better work in the office. I’d like to keep you here if I can. Is that something you’d ever consider?” Tanya didn’t quite think she managed to keep the shock from showing on her face. Eight years. Eight years she’d been waiting for someone to say those words to her. Never mind that it was two years too late to make a difference, it was a start. Someone with real power in the Army had finally gotten it through their skull that she could contribute more off the battlefield than on it. An honest recognition of the freedom of your other party to make another choice, an open statement of intent - now that was how you started a negotiation. “I would,” she said, after a moment’s deliberation. There was no sense in turning down the chance to pick back up the career she’d left midway through if its future was going to be different than its past. The problem was, Lehrgen wasn’t the only one in charge of making that decision. “But let me ask you something in return. Do you think we’ll win the right to form aerial units back?” She wouldn’t want to repeat her earlier faux pas by implying she wouldn’t serve as a mage in the event it became necessary. It was better to lead Lehrgen along to the conclusion himself: his superiors might see things differently and stick her in a less ideal position for her talents, depriving both of them of what they wanted. “In time, I expect we will,” he admitted. “You being a part of one isn’t written in stone. If we don’t end up seeing war on a continent-wide scale again, anyone could see that squandering you away on patrolling is senseless.” “Well, I don’t disagree,” she said, flashing a quick smile and then cocking her head. “That doesn’t account for war that isn’t on that scale.” “There’s no denying that,” he sighed. “Anyway, will you think about it, at least?” This time when she rose, she held out a hand for him to shake. It was hard to imagine how this conversation could have gone better. She’d eliminated any doubts about her reliability. She’d received an informal offer for a safe, well-paid position. And now that Lehrgen had recognized her capabilities as being better suited for working in the Staff Office, it was a significant step towards him seeing what she could contribute to any other type of office. Maybe there was one person besides herself who properly respected rational self-interest. “I’ll think about it.” xXx I’m going to need another drink, Erich von Lehrgen laughed to himself, leaning back far enough in his chair to tip the front legs off the ground. And not a drink from the glass of water he’d nearly let slip from his grasp a few minutes ago when Tanya had apologized. Now was the time she chose to do it. Not when she nearly killed a fellow cadet. Not when she made an enemy of Northern Army Command. Not when she was court-martialed the first time. Not when she took new recruits on a night raid as a training exercise. Not when she laid hands on her base commander. Not when she was court-martialed the second time. Not when she ruffled feathers at HQ after riding roughshod over a few people grabbing any available equipment or manpower she could get her hands on. Now. It might be slow, but it was a step in the right direction. As always, the next move had been two steps in the wrong direction, an endless, Sisyphean cycle from which he had yet to find an exit. His chair plunked back down, the minute of levity he allowed himself over so that he could finish reading the brief he’d been taking notes on when Tanya interrupted him before he went in search of a third sip of liquor. The previous two hadn’t hurt his mental acuity per se, but they hadn’t exactly helped. In a way, they were already taking advantage of the shaky international order coming into existence. Elbowing a path into a position to not only defend but be capable of conquering again wasn’t without a certain logic. The same insidious logic that underlay every idea Tanya had. It was what made them so dangerous, so compelling. So well-received by his bosses, current and former. He crumpled the page of notes he was taking, it being more filled with crossed-out sentences than anything else, and threw it into his wastebin. The brief would be there tomorrow. For today, Tanya had gifted to him a new concern with which to preoccupy himself. He’d give her credit for warning him to be vigilant in identifying latent threats from once and future enemies. And from Tanya herself, were she to be stationed in the wrong place at the wrong time. Whether he owed her a thank-you for making him privy to her secret schemes was something no etiquette instruction he’d received had ever covered. For that, and that alone, keeping her close and playing her confidante was worth the inevitable headache. It had stunned her into slack-jawed incredulity when he suggested she might belong anywhere in the Army aside from the mage corps. Nonetheless, she hadn’t rejected his offer of a compromise he wasn’t sure he had the sole authority to tender to her, a career in the Army, but one officially stationed in the office, trapped by the same bureaucracy he was, where she wouldn’t have the chance to take matters into her own hands again and incur the wrath of their neighbors. Somehow or another, that had ended the conversation by walking three steps in the right direction and staying there, the resolute grip of her handshake attesting to her promise being made seriously. A promise to consider keeping the hand he’d been shaking uncallused except for by a pen. It wasn’t a lie when he said that her talents would be wasted on basic patrolling. They had to rely on creativity and agility now that brute force was no longer an option. All the same, if she suggested she preferred a field assignment, he was sure Romel would give it to her over his objections. At the least, it was progress. She’d agreed to consider officework over being in the field, even after confessing what she might want to do in the field. That was halfway to her realizing that maybe she’d enjoy working in offices besides the General Staff Office. As soon as he finished putting his papers into the right tray, he was back at Ernst’s desk, the chair he’d used earlier still there for him to drop unceremoniously into. “Let’s have another.” “I told her not to go in there,” Ernst groaned, fishing the bottle out. “You what?” Lehrgen asked, letting his displeasure leak through his tone. Depending on what Ernst had said to her, he might have to revise his assumption that Tanya would default to working with him instead of around him. “I didn’t say you secretly hate her or something,” Ernst said, clicking his tongue at the implication that he couldn’t be trusted to know what he’d been told in confidence. “Just that it might not be the best time.” “Good,” Lehrgen replied, taking a sip and grimacing. “Hard to secretly hate someone when they agree to an armistice on fair terms.” “Sir?” “She’s tentatively willing to consider a career not involving active combat. Doesn’t sound like much, but,” he shrugged, “for Tanya, it’s a lot.” Ernst didn’t say anything, only lifted an eyebrow. Calling it a lot must’ve sounded like uncharacteristic hyperbole without hearing the thinly-veiled statement of intent that preceded it. “Anyway, can you let Romel know I’d like to meet with him before the end of the day?” Lehrgen asked, rising from his chair to return to his office. “Of course, sir,” Ernst said, already picking up the phone by the time Lehrgen turned away to leave. Technically, meeting at seven in the evening counted as meeting before the end of the day. Mid-August sunsets weren’t until eight-thirty. “I expect this is for a good reason,” Romel said, once Lehrgen was occupying the seat across from him. “I don’t like working late as much as you do.” “I don’t like working late,” Lehrgen corrected automatically. If he got a day off each time he fended off the accusation, there was a fair chance he’d be retired already. “I don’t have a choice.” Romel gave a skeptical snort. “You’ve already made more of yourself than most men ever will. General in the Army. And at your age.” “In an army that might be able to repulse a marauding band of bears,” Lehrgen commented. “If we really tried.” “I don’t think we even have bears in the country anymore,” Romel frowned, looking wistfully towards one of his windows. Lehrgen tilted his head in knowing acknowledgement of that fact, and when Romel’s head swiveled back around to look, he gave a bark of laughter at the accidental joke - for the moment, the only enemies their army could hope to defeat were nonexistent. “We aren’t in as bad of shape as we could’ve been,” Romel reasoned. “Plans take time.” “As I said, sir. Plenty of work to go around yet.” With a heartfelt sigh, Romel gave a grudging nod of agreement and sank deeper into his chair, raising his arms to interlock his fingers behind his head. “Well then, are you here just to tell me I’ll never win a battle again?” “Here on the subject of fighting losing battles, actually. Something came out of my meeting with Degurechaff today. A...concern of hers,” Lehrgen said, choosing his words carefully. No matter how impossible a plan sounded, simply giving it her blessing might be enough to convince Romel it had some worth. Dark clouds over welcome news were as sure as silver linings to dark clouds. Namely, in the case of the current openness to diplomacy, the plague of optimism which infected a select group of people, embittered by the past few years and unwilling to accept Imperial dismemberment as permanent, the ones who believed their mistake had mostly been operating on enemy terms, constantly caught on the wrong foot by foreign antagonism, reactive instead of proactive. Under such a paradigm, Imperial diplomatic efforts meant that any future wars could happen on the Empire’s terms, kept quick and contained. An eventual reunion with the Ostrian Empire would be bloodless so long as there was no outside interference. Firmly disavowing any further interest in territories that didn’t want to be Imperial - the Lowlands, Danemark, perhaps Ungarin - might suffice for limiting international involvement to condemnation instead of conquest. Retaking Polaska depended on how committed the Federation was to keeping it and how committed the rest of Europa was to prying it back from the communist party. The right words from the right ambassadors could influence attitudes on both matters to suit the Empire. Brazenly optimistic, but not out of the question. What was out of the question, he hoped, was a full rematch after the Empire better prepared itself to face a major war again. There were days he wasn’t so sure that was too far-fetched an ending to the story of patching their nation back together. The boundary between preparing a defensible position and preparing an invasive one was more of a river with a few deep spots than a fathomless gulf. He had little alternative beyond complicity. Risk leaving his country ludicrously underdefended and eventually sold for parts when the other nations of Europa exhausted their ability to colonize other parts of the globe, or risk leaving his successors the tools for making reckless delusions of grandeur a reality so that the other nations of Europe decided that selling the country for parts was the only solution left. It was a choice of the Devil’s own making. But if it came down to it, he’d rather the country die trying. “Oh?” Romel asked, interested enough at the mention of Tanya’s personal opinion that he leaned back towards his desk and reached for a pen. “Obviously, we have little in the way of means to win anything serious, so our best hope is to avoid conflict until we can, by whatever means necessary.” Romel gave a curt nod. “Her point was that if the universal answer, from us and other countries, to small aggressions is little or nothing besides political denouncement, we could quite ironically invite another war that decimates the continent by trying too hard to keep the peace,” Lehrgen explained, fighting to neither eye the superior vintage of brandy on the corner of Romel’s desk too intently nor take off his glasses to run his hands up his face and into his hair. “By the time another war does break out, it won’t be over just whatever line was crossed most recently, but over all the other lines crossed before that.” The look of purest amusement that stole over Romel’s face and transformed it back into the youthful impishness it had lost a few years ago contradicted the gravity that Tanya’s latest premonition warranted. “So,” Romel said, a cigar to puff on the only thing missing from the quintessential picture of a triumphant general, “you're saying she managed to convince you not to oppose it when in a few years, she asks to be given the opportunity to go back into battle?” Lehrgen took the admittedly deserved ribbing with good humor. The alternative, that Romel’s reaction to Tanya’s pronouncement was a sign of approbation rather than apprehension, belonged in the deepest reaches of his nightmares. “Well…” he began, stopping to frown. If she’d extracted the truth of their relationship from whatever it was Ernst had told her, there was a chance she’d hidden her motive in the way Romel suggested. Momentarily, he shook his head to himself, forgetting that a superior officer was watching him carry on an internal debate. Her gaze when she’d clasped his hand had been steady. Unwavering. Grateful, if possible, that he’d heard her out in spite of differing perspectives. “In a way,” he replied. It was more that she’d managed to convince him he’d rather send her into a strictly controlled tussle than let it get to the point where she could start another world war, but the distinction wasn’t particularly important except for preserving his ego. “There is some logic to it.” “There is,” Romel agreed, tipping out a pour of that brandy Lehrgen hadn’t been staring at. “There always is. It’s something I’ll keep in mind. Though we can hope it won’t come to that. If I’m going to send our men in, I’d rather do it thinking they’ll win.” Silently, Lehrgen raised his glass to toast the sentiment. In the presence of his fourth drink, words would only complicate things. xXx Tanya approached the grand set of doors leading into the office of the Commander of the Armed Forces with more trepidation than usual. Without fail, meetings with General von Romel were scheduled two weeks or more in advance. The abrupt summons felt a bit like how she’d imagined the experience of being called down to the principal’s office would go. Funny that it should happen for the first time decades after her scholastic days. Considering the past week, she had her suspicions on what had precipitated the impromptu appointment. Of course, she wasn’t going to preemptively admit to a fault in her patriotic character. Playing the ingénue was one deceit exclusive to her current life. “You wanted to see me, sir?” she asked, with as much innocence as she could muster. “Was there something important?” “Not particularly,” Romel said. “Only to say that you never cease to amaze me.” “Sir?” she asked, startled. Cautiously, she allowed some optimism to build. “You’ve managed to get Lehrgen to rethink his position on sending you into the field,” Romel chuckled, shaking his head. How reliable. It had only been three days since he’d done his best to woo her into making a career out of the job she was currently doing. Eager to cross one of her objections off the list, he wasn’t wasting any time pressuring the people who counted to come around. “And what do you think, sir?” she pressed. Ultimately, any career of hers in the Army hinged on Romel’s vision for the future. Lehrgen could act the salesman and make all the promises he wanted without having to put his life on the line if he overhyped the product. With all due respect to him, she put more stock in Romel’s unfiltered opinion than any assurances by a third party. “I don’t know yet,” Romel grunted, giving her a once over with a critical eye. It wasn’t the answer she wanted, but that was to be expected. Romel had experience commanding her in the field, which naturally biased his perspective. Leaving open the possibility of changing his opinion was all but saying it was on her to do more to prove her worth behind a desk. “So, what I’m hearing is you’d rather fight a more limited engagement sooner than a world war later,” he continued, moving right along to the other actionable item coming out of her meeting with Lehrgen. “I wouldn’t say I’d rather, sir,” she clarified. Neither would suit her just fine. “Only that I like the chances of the former better than the latter.” Actually, she didn’t think their chances of winning either were particularly good. Her personal fate was simply superior under one. Another plus side to things like limited engagements was they didn’t tend to involve universal conscription being bandied around again. Under a thoroughly democratic system, politicians deliberating took too much time to make it a workable solution. She was put on the receiving end of an assessing gaze for the second time in as many minutes. If Romel expected her demeanor to give any hints as to her selfish intentions, he was out of luck. The world’s best body-language experts couldn’t find a crack in the mask of a professional salaryman worth the name. “Well, I’ll keep it in mind,” he promised, breaking the uncomfortable silence. “But I wouldn’t want to show our cards too soon.” “Of course, sir,” Tanya nodded. Rushing to the field with more players than the rules allowed could trigger a whole host of other problems. Forget Plan B, the Army was looking at their covert rearmament as an emergency backstop labeled as some letter in the middle of the alphabet. Until the politicians had succeeded in chipping away at the treaty or negotiating some other quid pro quo with the Commonwealth or States, Romel wasn’t wrong in being circumspect about the idea of drawing a line in the sand when they didn’t absolutely have to. “Degurechaff,” Romel called, as she left his office. She turned back. “Give the poor boy a break every once in a while, won’t you?” he asked, with a wink and then a wave of dismissal. Tanya waited until she was facing the door to roll her eyes. Lehrgen could get a break from dealing with reality when she did. xXx General or no, Erich von Lehrgen made his first and second cup of coffee every morning by his own hand. The first at home, done in the old method over the stove, a handful of grounds unfailingly mixed in for him to pretend not to notice as he drank, topped off with an inexact splash of cream. That cup was never savored. Perfecting it was not a worthwhile imposition on his time. The second cup was made shortly after he arrived to the office. It would be sipped slowly as he relished the leisure of his morning. A bad cup would ruin it, and everything that came after. He prepared it with the according care. The kettle, removed from heat after it had begun to shake but before it whistled. Its water, poured at just the right speed through the filter. Cream, added until the shade of brown matched the muted tone of the kitchen’s wallpaper. The process was as much a reward as the product. Each morning’s precariously overfull cup carried in it the vain aspiration that it alone would be sufficient to see the day through. Carefully, carefully so it didn’t spill, Lehrgen floated it up off the counter with both hands. Eyes locked onto every minute ripple of the mug’s contents, his feet began the unnatural, too-smooth glide back to his desk. “Damn,” he cursed, the expletive leaving his mouth before he felt the burn of scalding liquid on his hand, his arm jolted by a collision with someone else rounding the same corner as him. “I’m sorry.” When he registered whom he’d just emptied three-quarters of a cup over, he bit back a more uncouth tidbit of profanity. In spite of the fact that it was technically her fault for walking on the wrong side of the hall, he was going to be made very sorry for perpetrating the indignity, he was sure. Tanya was smiling up at him. Beaming. He would almost go so far as to say glowing. Unspeakable tortures would be enacted upon him for interrupting her trip back from the bathroom by forcing her to wear the substance she held most dear. “It’s alright,” she said, wiping her face off with a sleeve, grin as of yet remaining, like she was envisioning in what creative ways she would take her revenge. “I was distracted. It was my mistake.” The alarm bells continued clanging while he stood there, everything about the picture he was seeing wrong in some indeterminate way, as if he’d been sent to a world where the rules of logic were ever-so-slightly off. “I can pay for the shirt,” he offered. “It’s probably ruined.” “No need,” she intoned cheerily. “Are you sure?” “It’s hard to ruin a day that starts off perfectly,” she said, with a nod and another wipe of her face to clear the coffee that had seeped down from her hair. He raised an eyebrow, curious as to by what stretch of the imagination her present circumstances could be termed starting off perfectly. “Just some good news I'd been waiting on came this morning,” she continued, waving the implied question off. “Well, it’s still an hour before the start to the day,” he said, after glancing down to double-check the time on his watch. “Get yourself home and cleaned up.” “Will do, sir,” she replied. Her journey to her office was promptly resumed, leaving him to go duplicate the painstakingly-made cup, with the exception of leaving a half-centimeter of room to spare at the top. He walked back to his own office still feeling like the world was out of alignment. It might not be until after he had his second coffee in hand that he read the paper in earnest, but he made a quick perusal of it over his first so he’d know where to draw the line between what he needed to read and what he wanted to. None of what he remembered seeing had struck him as good. He picked up the paper again once he was settled behind his desk. An instant later, his shoulders sagged. One of the front page articles was a profile of the newest sensation in Ildoa. Silvio Berluscone. The champion of the people, out to restore the glory of Rome. Caesar, born again. Just how much can she predict? he thought, setting his cup down to cradle his head in his hands. It had been inside of three weeks since she described a leader of his ilk. Slovania was a constituent of the Ostrian Empire now. From a military standpoint, defending its borders was the absolute definition of not his problem anymore. Or, it wouldn’t be, if they lived in a vacuum. Were the Ostrians to suffer the ignominy of Ildoa taking the territory, in whole or in part, only the intentionally ignorant would fail to realize the precedent it set. Immediately and perhaps irrevocably, the citizens of the Germanic Empires would alienate themselves from an international syndicate which had confiscated the bulk of their armies and then refused to assist when the predictable cannibalization began. Of all the sorts of days, his least favorite were the sort where his most effective act was reduced to sending up a prayer. On the off chance it helped, he’d make the brief pilgrimage down the street to Johanneskirche on Sunday. At times, it was hard to escape the feeling that the only entity with the power to proscribe Tanya the destiny she intended to carve into the history books might be God Himself. Might be, because even God would have His hands full. 




 

 A little bit of Erica, by my side






 
 "I didn't say I liked it. I said it fascinated me. There is a great difference."
 
 September 15, 1930Outside Schafhausen, Waldstätte Confederacy
 There was a reassuring mildness to the planks of beaten wood as Erich von Lehrgen trailed his finger along the workbench while he passed. The same temperature as the air, maybe a degree cooler to the touch, it was more alive than the unnaturally hot or cold metal surrounding it. A reminder that he wasn’t in the middle of some prophetic revelation showing him why the gods had punished Prometheus for giving humanity the gift of fire, and in doing so, given them an ability to create and control and destroy on a scale previously reserved for the divine. He ventured along the factory floor with less trepidation than he’d begun the day. The sparks in the air were less threatening than they appeared. An hour ago, when they’d hit a hand that had gestured too far, he’d barely felt their heat. Now that his ears had adjusted, the individual clinks and clanks and clunks of metal were no longer an alien roar. He was even starting to understand the pattern that governed the rhythm of the work. Or not, he thought, nearly bumping into a bald, hunched goblin of a man wielding a blowtorch who hurled hateful eyes after him. Feeling out-of-place for reasons beyond being a freshly-pressed charcoal suit in a sea of patched overalls and stained smocks, Lehrgen strode along to catch up with the floor manager as they made their way to the next station. He paused again midway to let a crew of four run by, and at the interruption repeated to himself what he wanted to note down once he was out of harm’s way. Among other lessons, he’d learned he’d grown far too accustomed to people moving out of his path and not the other way around, which had turned his habit of writing while walking into an invitation for papers scattered and trampled on the floor. On the surface, the rifle he picked up out of the pile bore a close resemblance to the first G98 he’d been issued almost twenty years ago, a familiar, meter-high friend made of wood and steel. On the surface. Reliably as the design had served the Imperial Army, it hadn’t survived the war without any modifications. The fiery baptism had taught them a thing or two about what worked. And a thing or three about what didn’t. His hirsute tour guide, a Mr. Eberle, turned to him, stroking a mustache styled in a way that was last in fashion during Lehrgen’s very earliest memories of childhood. “Those are off to Finnland,” Eberle told him. “Prototypes. To see if we’ve made them something that works as well as the Federation’s in the cold.” Their weapons had been designed to fight off all enemies, with the exception of mankind’s oldest and cruelest. He’d seen more than one soldier in Logistics huddled in a corner while they coached themselves through a nervous breakdown. Heat had spoiled food. Sandstorms had simultaneously scrapped entire boxes of spell-laden bullets and jammed every piece of equipment with a moving part. Icy cold had defeated engines only for the ice to melt so water could do its own form of damage. Though the Imperial arms industry might not be able to benefit from designing weapons for its own army, there was nothing stopping them from doing so on behalf of others and learning in the process, the only caveat being that they couldn’t export from home soil to foreign territory. Foreign territory to foreign territory was fair game. Rudersdorf hadn’t established himself in Waldstätte for nothing. Lehrgen raised the rifle higher until it was level with his eyes, inspecting the precise beauty of Imperial engineering until his gaze flickered to a man disappearing and reappearing in what had previously looked like the back corner of the factory, where there must have been a hall instead. Absentmindedly, he replaced the weapon to the pile he’d drawn it from so he could investigate. War stories of booby-trapped curiosities hadn’t succeeded in removing all traces of a boyhood fascination with secret passages, which the architect of their estate had inconveniently declined to include. The neighboring Dohnoff property had been blessed with several, which a seven-year-old Marian had discovered and withheld, revealing one at random as a treat, so that each time his parents were invited to visit thereafter he begged to go along and the nurse had to pack up and bring Otto also. Behind him, he could hear the double-timed steps of Eberle trying to keep pace. No shouts asking what he was doing were a good indication the factory kept no secrets other than those belonging to the Imperial Army. Through a false wall, into an air raid shelter which itself had a false floor, then down a ladder, he climbed until his feet hit solid ground and stepped hesitantly forward. He jumped when something brushed across his forehead before realizing it was a cord. His hand fumbled to find it again then pulled, lighting up the room as Eberle finished his descent. “I see you’ve found our mistakes,” he said, turning his powerfully stocky frame around and sweeping an arm out, each word he spoke adulterated with a Suabian accent as thick and impenetrable as its Black Forest origins. Lehrgen envied him the ease he must have enjoyed in deciphering the local Waldstätten dialect. “So far, we’ve only found one client for ‘em.” Not every product went successfully to market. Any auditor deigning to check the books would see nothing strange about offloading unpopular inventory at a thin margin, and if he pried into the buyer he’d only stop and laugh once he saw it was someone in Magna Rumeli taking the rejects no proper Europaen army wanted. At Eberle’s gesture, Lehrgen took a dull metal case down from the nearest shelf and unlatched it, digging his thumbs into metal when unused springs resisted. The weapon inside, with its long, sturdy barrel of burnished steel dotted with holes like dark, malevolent eyes and without the ugly bulk typical of a machine gun, resembled death so closely a man from the Stone Age would have known to fear it. A new breed of weapon for a new breed of warfare. With reverent care, he lifted it from its resting place and hefted the unfamiliar battlefield companion in his arms. The official demonstration wasn’t for another month, making him one of the first to hold it aside from the officers sent back and forth during development. “It’s heavy,” Lehrgen frowned. Unless his exercise regimen was in want of an update, it overshot the ten kilograms they’d requested as the weight limit. “Not too heavy for one man to carry,” Eberle said, giving a shrug. “Unless the Army’s in worse a state than I’d heard.” The lovechild of half a hundred minds, it had taken all the resentments of the Army’s leadership combined, plus the better part of a year, to conceive a scenario under which an enemy could be encouraged to think twice about continuing an incursion and then deliver up a weapon suited to the task. Lehrgen’s own addition to the design had more or less been in ensuring it was operable by a single soldier. “Give her a try?” Eberle asked after another moment, cracking a wide smile. He hesitated a moment. Machine gun technique was well outside his range of expertise. Authority Eberle no doubt was in his field, Lehrgen hardly wanted to embarrass himself in front of a man who looked like he’d consider it an accomplishment if all his children finished primary school. “What the hell,” he chuckled a second later. He’d probably never see the other man again; there were few better places to make a fool of himself. And it was a poor army that judged its generals purely on competence in handling a machine gun. From a deep pocket, Eberle produced a variegated key ring. By what could only be a form of divination, he plucked the desired key out from its peers and unlocked yet another unobtrusive door, this one nearly obscured by a shelving unit. “Bit of a walk,” the other man said, once they stepped into a tunnel, the low ceiling intermittently lit by orange-hued bulbs strung too far apart to eliminate dark patches. In the time it had taken for bit of a walk to prove to be an understatement, Lehrgen’s initial interest in the passageway had faded. It would qualify as the most tactless combination of Medieval and industrial styles he’d run across if it weren’t the sole member of the category. Unpleasantly dim with no mystery to the repetitive subway tile, uncomfortably claustrophobic yet perfectly safe on account of warning signs near potential hazards, his list could go on. Eyes resigning themselves to finding nothing more intriguing than the uneven chops Eberle had made when he’d cut the back of his own hair - unless he paid someone to do that to him - Lehrgen let his concentration drift back to work-related matters. It was the first truly illicit project he’d worked on. Not quite yet, at least not going by the strictest letter of the law, because there was nothing illicit about the business he was touring being owned by Imperial investors nor in the business hiring veteran workers of the Imperial arms industry. He had signed his name to no papers, and wouldn’t. Apparently, he’d made Romel’s “not particularly expendable” list. Regardless, he knew. In not so long, the case he was carrying along with all the others would be sold to a representative of the government of Magna Rumeli more interested in sourcing funds and friends for the future country of Turkie than in doing the same for a dying empire. Whether he assisted the Imperial Army or not, their Rumelian contact would already be in conflict with every power in Europa waiting for a chance to divvy up the spoils. Through a method his own subordinate had devised involving a dizzying dozen other businesses that all led back to Imperial ownership, the Army would take possession of the weapons. In itself that was arguably legal so long as they didn’t cross the border into Imperial territory. What would be illegal was when they did cross, which he knew they would, even if he remained innocent of the details of how and when. Three thousand of the new class of “universal” machine guns, slightly over the two-thousand eight-hundred and thirty-five they were currently allowed between heavy and light, would slip by to find a final destination in some old aristocrat’s potato cellar, and select members of the Imperial Army would be invited for weekend visits to the estate so they could go hunting for whichever animal required sustained gunfire to kill. Legally, they could have produced the same guns in the approved and inspected Imperial factory. Maybe it was only how he justified it to himself, but their only sin would be housing both the new and old machine guns in the country at the same time. And the only reason they were doing that was because the only strength left to their Army at the moment was the element of surprise when they swapped out the old weapons for the new. In an overabundance of caution - the same caution exercised in designating the face of the factory floor to be a man whose indifferent attempts at standard Germanian made him hard to distinguish from a proud Waldstätter grudgingly adapting his language for foreign clients - the Imperial Army did their utmost to show any Commonwealth inspectors what they expected to see. Unnecessarily prudent? Maybe. So far, the Albish guests announcing their visits to Imperial territory weeks in advance had been more concerned with checking off boxes than checking every square inch of space for abnormalities. That aside, any hint that there had been a temporary overhaul to the Imperial Army’s strategic plans was to be kept invisible. Unconventional tactics only worked so long as a curiously probing army came prepared to fight a conventional war. A bright-white plaque jarred Lehrgen briefly out of his thoughts so he could duck under a sign warning him that he’d have to duck under an underground pipe with only a meter and a half of clearance. He hoped that meant he’d reached the halfway point of his impromptu journey, his feet vaguely registering flat ground after they’d been on a slow descent for the past twenty minutes. If the Imperial Army couldn’t win battles, their next best option was to not lose them. In other words, refuse to meet for a handful of engagements that would result in the inevitable capture or death of the bulk of their soldiers. They’d do more damage as a highly-trained and well-equipped resistance force of sorts, keeping aspiring occupiers constantly peeking over shoulders, ruining resupply efforts, looking for opportunities to outmaneuver, cut off, then crush an enemy by bits and pieces. Their options, as Romel had so succinctly put it when he’d proposed making a national strategy out of what he did best, were to “lose fast, or lose slow enough to make a difference.” It was common knowledge that three of their neighbors - the Republic, the Entente, the Federation - had originally wanted the Empire split into more constituent states than two. International politics moving in a more conciliatory direction since didn’t preclude one or all of them from reneging on the agreement and testing the waters. In the case of the Federation, losing slowly enough meant time to tempt the rest of Europa into joining an anti-Communist cause. In the case of a country that elected its leaders, any war in the near future would have to be sold as quick and easy. Deny a politician that, and the voters might decide a vote of no-confidence was in order. In the best case scenario, they’d buy enough time to convert factories back to armaments production and rush former soldiers through a refresher course, and maybe they wouldn’t have to lose at all. Attractive as that sounded, his country’s factories weren’t that efficient. Yet. For now, what they had was their newest weapon. Light enough to be carried, powerful enough to lay down defensive fire, versatile enough to mount on a variety of vehicles. Easy to mass-produce, easy on the budget compared to older styles, and easy to use, if not easy to use well. “Almost there,” Eberle called, interrupting Lehrgen moments before the older man fished out another key from his ring in near-total darkness to unlock a hatch in the ceiling. Stepping out into a field dappled with sunlight where it pierced through the cloud cover had Lehrgen instinctively taking a deep breath of fresh air. In spite of the two kilometers or more of distance they’d covered getting away from the factory, the metallic tang of industry seized his senses in an unkind betrayal by the direction of the wind. He’d expected to draw in the cloying perfume the penultimate days of summer cloaked itself in, of thick air that brought warm rain and flowers turning from fecund to fetid as they hovered at their death, and his neighbor’s herb garden when the housekeeper trimmed the leaves to dress dinner. In reality, a cigarette would have smelled more natural. He undid the single button holding his suit together and shrugged the jacket off, folded it neatly and placed it on a friendly-looking growth of grass, then approached the patchier section of earth where elbows had exposed the dirt. His would almost certainly be the first elbows to touch down in newly-purchased businesswear. A valiant sacrifice for his country. He wasn’t so helpless he couldn’t unfold the bipod without instruction. Once that was done, he peered through the sights and adjusted his positioning without much surety he’d hit the target five hundred meters out. “You saw action on the front?” Eberle asked. “Saw being the operative word,” Lehrgen replied, wishing he was still standing so he could scuff a heel in the grass. “Surprising, unless you’ve found the fountain of youth,” the other man said evenly, evidently a practiced hand at disguising his scorn from superior officers. “I was through War College by the time it all started,” he deflected. “You?” “Not so young anymore, me,” Eberle grinned. “Wasn’t called up until that big fuss before we took Parisee. Eastern Front later on.” “Didn’t put you off weapons, I see.” “It was this or logging,” Eberle said, with a humorless laugh. “Like my father. And his father. And however many fathers since we learned to use axes.” “I know the feeling,” Lehrgen said, checking his sights one more time to be sure he was as sure as he could be. “Military family?” Eberle guessed. Lehrgen shook his left hand in a so-so gesture. “Not sure we should’ve thrown our cards in with you Preussians,” Eberle laughed, all the way from his belly. “Too ambitious, the lot of you. And look at where it got us.” “To a world where loggers can have sons who run factories,” Lehrgen laughed back. “Well said,” Eberle conceded with good humor. “And your sons? Destined for the Army?” Lehrgen shifted his weight so he could wave his conspicuously ring-free right hand in the air. “Just as well,” Eberle tsked. “If I ever bring up my time in the war, wife only wants to tell me I did my duty and stop whining about it.” “You have children?” “Three. Living, at least. Oldest son’s a doctor. Girl ran off to write for some magazine before she could get settled. Younger boy’s in university for chemistry.” A short hum of surprise left Lehrgen’s mouth unbidden. “What?” Eberle asked. “Nothing,” Lehrgen replied. “Nothing. Just...my congratulations.” “Good thing you Preussians took such an interest in education. Don’t know where they’d be without scholarships,” Eberle winked, then gestured at where Lehrgen was still lying in the grass. “Guess we should get on with it. If you were anywhere near any front, you’ll know this won’t be kind on the ears.” Loading the ammunition belt was a matter of sliding a bolt back and forth and keeping in mind the difference between the up and down sides, which Lehrgen was duly assured was much easier to confuse while under fire. Regardless, even without training it took a bare handful of seconds. One requirement he could check off. “Never aimed one of these before,” he admitted, readying himself to fire. “Anything I should know?” “Don’t get your hopes up,” Eberle advised. “I’m not so bad as you’d expect,” Lehrgen replied, tapping knowingly at his glasses. “Quite good, actually.” “Don’t matter so much as you’d expect. Accuracy isn’t where we’d like it to be. Maybe next prototype. Not so important when you can get out bursts that fast.” It was important to someone, Lehrgen thought, giving a small sigh. He’d have to report that back to General Fahrion. He’d apparently been the one person to request the impossible so far in this endeavor. Back during the phase where they’d gathered up requirements and requests and wishes, Zettour had kept everyone’s noses forcefully shoved into their papers until they’d unearthed every iota of written wisdom from former officers. Plenty had turned up they hadn’t had time to review during the war. Some captain or other who claimed they were overestimating the range a soldier’s personal firearm needed to cover by double or more. They’d look into that suggestion. One day. When they could dream about fighting proper battles again. Among Lehrgen’s own personal records there had been a grumbling of sorts from a former lieutenant colonel, aged thirteen at the time of writing, which sounded more bizarre the further they got from those days. According to her, the Imperial Army had trouble with versatility. She’d meant it in the context of switching from offensive to defensive roles. By her account, the Eastern Front had been tumultuous, to say the least, when their men needed to beat a hasty retreat. Nonetheless, versatility had gotten everyone thinking they could design a weapon meant to do more than represent an updated version of their old ones. He was sure Tanya would be nothing short of delighted to know that in her own small way she’d contributed to their next generation of deadly weapons, which was why he was determined never to mention it to her. Someone else probably had, in any case. I hope we aren’t billed extra for these bullets, Lehrgen thought to himself with a smile, taking a final deep breath in and letting all the air out. When he squeezed, the brief motion loosed too many shots for him to count individually, like they’d weaponized the sound of a flip book’s pages flickering by. Instinctively, his finger retracted. “Hardest part will be training the boys not to waste ammo,” Eberle commented, still crouched next to him. “Lighter spring slows it down.” “We’ll find a way to stage a mock-up for educational purposes, I’m sure,” Lehrgen said. “Too much enthusiasm and heat’ll warp the barrel,” the other man continued, tapping at the warm metal, “but for demonstration, well - I’m telling you, you really should try emptying the thing.” With only another deep breath, his finger depressed the trigger again. The muscle responsible for the motion twitched, wanting to jump back at the sound of fire. He didn’t let it. In all of a few seconds, the remaining rounds were making some modernist art piece out of his target and some of the trees behind it. Perhaps they could start selling their old practice pieces to museums to raise some extra money. A meditation on man, the machine, and the tragedy of the human condition. An artist’s dream. He was back on his feet and dusting off his trousers nearly as quickly as he’d finished his pièce de résistance, before he could be handed another round of ammunition to load. “I-,” he began, grabbing at his right hand to still it, “I’m not sure we should’ve invented that. It’s almost appalling.” “What, being on the other end and hearing how quick it unloads? Wasn’t that the point?” Eberle chuckled. “Well, yes, but more that…” Lehrgen paused again for a steadying breath. “It’s...it’s a bit…” “A bit fun, isn’t it?” the other man said, patting him on the back. “A bit, yes,” Lehrgen agreed. “Think I could use a drink.” “Really makes you understand mortality, doesn’t it?” “Makes me understand something far better than I’d like to, anyway,” he sighed. “Go into town. Find the town hall. Go north, away from the river, that is, take a left at the next street, second shop on your left is where you’ll find lunch and a good beer.” “Appreciate it,” Lehrgen said. “And before we’re done here, I could fire this from standing?” Eberle looked him up and down. “Could…” he said slowly. “Wouldn’t recommend it unless you’d like a sore shoulder.” “I’ll take your word for it.” Lehrgen picked up his notebook back up to scrawl out the last of his notes. They would have fit perfectly onto the last page if he hadn’t remembered a final question. “And to change the barrel?” he asked. Given how he’d forgotten to ask earlier when they’d touched on the subject of overheating, his mind must’ve taken its vacation a bit early. Eberle leaned down and snatched the rifle off the ground. “Slide this bolt here,” he said, demonstrating for effect. The barrel neatly popped out the side. All of a half day’s training and a toddler could do it halfway competently. “Imperial engineering,” Lehrgen muttered in a sort of believing disbelief, as he looked for a page towards the beginning of his notebook when he’d reveled in the halcyon days of being reckless with blank spaces, to record his last last notes for the day. Sufficient uninhabited territory encountered on page thirty-seven, he folded down the corner of the paper so he wouldn’t forget where his out-of-order notes had gotten to and hung his jacket over his arm in preparation for his walk back. By the time he was done, Eberle had gotten the weapon back in its case. He waved Lehrgen along towards a service road. Five minutes later, he heard gravel crunching. When he turned his head to the left, a truck was lumbering towards them. The cabin already had one more passenger than it was designed for squashed inside. He and Eberle climbed onto the back and spent another five minutes collecting a layer of dust. After the ride was over, he took his glasses off and blew on them, then turned to face a wall and tugged a section of undershirt free to wipe down the lenses. “Right,” Lehrgen said, offering a final handshake to his font of factory expertise. “I’ll let you get back to work while I take a look from up above.” The steps to the mezzanine weren’t difficult to find, even without the benefit of a tour guide. For a moment, he simply stood and stared down, like having a bird’s eye view would bring the whirlwind below into harmony. The Imperial talent for industry was, perhaps, an extension of the same traits that made them well-suited to distilling the maelstrom of war into something that could be directed into neatly outlined plans, every soldier accounted for and every soldier accountable for his specific task. A hand clapped down on his shoulder from behind, with a firmness that told him he wouldn’t want to be on the receiving end of those same fingers balled into a fist. “It’s something else, isn’t it?” Kurt von Rudersdorf said, with a bark of laughter. “I’m almost sorry I never got the chance to see the bellows of the Imperial war machine in their heyday.” “It’s…” he hesitated, not sure if mesmerizing or terrifying was the more accurate description. Both, if he told the truth. His former boss was doing altogether too good of a job pursuing a vision of what used to be. “Not really words for it, are there?” asked Hans von Zettour, silently coming up alongside him. Silently only in the context of their environs. He would have needed to shout his approach for it to be heard over the noise. “Are they all like this?” he asked back, voice raised enough to be heard. “You’ll have to see for yourself,” Rudersdorf grinned, ushering him out. “Tomorrow you’re visiting the plant in Orlikon?” Lehrgen nodded. “And the one in Thoun the day after.” “And then we’ll take a hunting trip. Since this is a vacation.” Rudersdorf reached into a pocket and drew out a slip of paper. “So if that’s settled, here’s the lunch recommendations the hotel gave me.” “I got one already.” “Not sure a factory man’s got the same tastes.” “You might be surprised,” Lehrgen said, after a second spent mulling his former boss’s piece of wisdom. A half-hour later, a cold beer was spilling its frothy excess over his fingers. It was as good as promised. “So,” Rudersdorf said, after they’d moved onto their second round. “I hear you kept Degurechaff for yourself instead of letting those big ideas of hers contribute to someone else’s career.” “A decision I have yet to regret,” Lehrgen replied truthfully. Mentioning her rather nefarious plans last month had been a downright excellent way to shore up any doubts he had about why he bothered himself with keeping an eye on her. If the story was that he’d done it for no reason beyond furthering his own career, so much the better, insulting as the accusation may be. “Still,” Zettour laughed. “I suppose the reason you’re working on vacation is if you’d billed it as a work trip with some leisure included, she might’ve tagged along.” Zettour didn’t know the half of it. Not long after he returned home, Lehrgen was scheduled for a visit to their remaining approved location for storing, and occasionally manufacturing, replacement parts for their artillery. Tanya had practically begged to come along, and he hadn’t found an adequate reason to say no. “I thought you couldn’t get enough of her,” Rudersdorf snorted, eyes sliding slyly in Zettour’s direction. “I said I implicitly trust her intuition when it comes to strategy,” Zettour countered. “A bit different than wanting to go on holiday with her hanging around.” Right, Lehrgen sighed, stuffing his mouth with several forkfuls of spätzle in case anything remotely resembling I told you so wanted to sneak its way out. Which is why I made sure she couldn’t find an excuse to join. Implicit trust wasn’t what her latest strategic gem called “abuse everyone’s goodwill until they’re forced to start another world war in some futile attempt to stop a nation that worships the opinion of a madwoman” deserved. Then again, leaving Tanya in the office, unsupervised, to her own unfortunate devices - vices, really, more than anything - was nearly as unpalatable an option. One day to herself was all it had taken the last time for blood-stained little fingers to paw through his belongings. He couldn’t prove it, which he knew, and which she undoubtedly knew as well. The only place it didn’t sound paranoid was inside his own head. In the history of ever, nobody alleging their papers had been rifled through did it because the papers had been left in perfect order, especially not when the accuser was known for being whatever the opposite of slovenly was. Persnickety, according to the new word his brother had learned in Albish as of his last letter. Orderly, yes. Perfect order, no. Never. And that was how he knew. When his papers got bumped during overnight cleaning, they were put back turned this way and that and invariably out of sequence. When he left them, they were one minor detail short of perfect. And in all his time, he’d met few perfectionists willing to outdo him. It wasn’t a superstition, quite. He’d never heard of such a stupid superstition. So stupid it was inadmissable unless he fancied repeating the pysch evaluation at such an awkward point in his career. A personal quirk was all it was. He’d never liked things that were too even, not since his earliest memories. Shoes were to be lined up so one was a bit ahead of the other. He’d surreptitiously move a chair a centimeter forward out of its row. The top paper on his stack was always skewed the slightest bit, to the side, to the top, shifted down. The method varied, but the fact remained that the top paper was not to be left immaculately in alignment with everything under it. One stack of papers that he’d collated and forgotten to blemish, maybe. Perhaps. The least known harbinger of the apocalypse, but possible. All his papers left too neatly, and he was either already dead and the rest of the world along with him, or someone had mistaken perfection minus one degree for the real thing. He couldn’t imagine who. Flattering, in its own way. As with anything, it could be a coincidence. While this may have never happened in his almost twenty years of working life, he couldn’t rule it out. Maybe there was some other explanation that didn’t include him hiring Tanya less than two months prior, her being overly curious what the rearmament plans were, and coming back to find his too-neat piles after Christmas, the only day on which he definitively knew she’d been in the office when he hadn’t. But yes, it could have been the guard at the front door. Fritz was such an untrustworthy fellow. Apparently, lock-picking had been the one skill missing amongst her eclectic set, as everything he’d wanted to hide had remained undisturbed. Unless she was playing a very clever psychological trick on him, which he couldn’t rule out. Nonetheless, that deficiency was sure to have been remedied in the intervening months if she was so interested. On second thought, he had done one thing counter to the rules he’d sworn to uphold: take sensitive documents home and lock them up there. Provided that she hadn’t bribed the admin in Personnel with more money that he had, which would be impressive, even for her, Tanya would remain blissfully unaware of his home address. “Anyway,” Zettour continued, after they’d all taken several long sips of their drinks, “I’d reckon she’s not so bad to have around the office as you’d thought. I’d have kept her on myself when she asked for a friend, but...well, politics, you know.” The optics of the Army’s highest-profile personality rehiring an at-best contentious figure from the war during the months of its immediate aftermath hadn’t been what Zettour needed when he was trying to make assurances he wouldn’t be a reckless leader. Two years later and it was still for the best that Tanya was under Lehrgen’s wing instead of Romel’s. Anyone scrutinizing the life and choices of Erich von Lehrgen had run into a very low point in their journalism career indeed. It took some hardship, but he managed to prove equally capable of rendering his vocal chords as mute with alcohol as with food before anything regrettable left his mouth. He waved his finger in the air for a third round before he answered Zettour’s implied question. “More a product of lack of opportunity than motive, I assure you,” he replied succinctly. “And if you don’t mind, I am on vacation, so further discussion of the subject…?” “Over,” Zettour sighed, with an impish smile. “Though I’ll just ask again next time.” xXx Marksmanship was not what made a great hunter. Mostly, it was patience. For walking, for finding the right spot, for waiting, for walking again. They were in the middle of the first round of walking now. It had been an early departure from the cabin they’d rented. Already, they’d progressed through the four seasons within two hours. High in the mountains, the day had dawned with a wintry chill, been superceded by a late-summer sun warming the sair, continued on to a spring shower, and by now had descended into an autumnal mist. “I shouldn’t have retired,” Zettour groaned, the dampened crush of underbrush beneath his feet alerting only the creatures within a two-hundred meter radius, instead of the full kilometer the sound would have been sent ricocheting through the air were the weather in a mood to crackle clean and crisp. “Turned me into an old man. Barely in decent shape anymore.” “You?” Rudersdorf guffawed, the deep voice resonating further than the sound of their boots. He threw the shoulders of his broader frame back and slapped his stomach. “Look at me.” “Never retire,” Zettour said, wagging his finger in Lehrgen’s direction. “It’ll be the death of you.” “As will working too hard,” he laughed. “Or so I’ve been told.” “It’s how they get you,” Rudersdorf chuckled, taking the hand he’d offered to clear a steep outcropping. “One way or another.” His former boss paused for a moment to take his bearings. Lehrgen did the same. Or tried to, at any rate. The section of earth they were stumbling through was indistinguishable from any other in the area. Low bushes already on their way to hibernation and scrubby greenery intermingled with rock face as far as the eye could see, the triple peaks of Eiger, Mönch, and Jungfrau on the distant horizon the sole landmarks. Rudersdorf must have found some pastoral inspiration in the scenery to point them to the right, where at long last they met up with a hunter’s path around the hill. “A question in confidence,” Lehrgen said, once there was an obvious trail to follow. “If I may.” “Shoot,” Zettour said. Lehrgen turned back just in time to see him winking at the pun. “Romel,” Lehrgen sighed. “He’s good at turning disadvantages around, no denying that. But wasn’t part of the problem that he ignored the larger schematics? Why nominate him to succeed you?” “Was,” Zettour puffed, as they clambered ever higher. “It was the problem. He focuses on what’s in front of him. So, put everything in front of him where there is no ignoring, problem solved. Plus, he came through the war with a clean record. Army needed a man like that, one without past mistakes casting suspicion on us.” “You run into trouble with him?” Rudersdorf interjected. “I always heard he rather liked you.” “Not him, exactly,” Lehrgen replied, feeling his own lungs beginning to prick and burn. “Your boss,” Zettour guessed. Lehrgen nodded. “I suppose my question should’ve been what you think about Romel promoting him. You know him.” “As a solid officer,” Zettour agreed. “And one that fantasizes about fighting battles that are over,” Lehrgen muttered. “Isn’t that dangerous?” “You can’t have an army full of soldiers who know they can’t win,” Rudersdorf offered. “The men on the ground need a man who tells them all the reasons it’s possible, not why it isn’t.” “So, what, I’ve hit a ceiling until I learn some optimism?” Lehrgen laughed, crouching low to duck under a rock. Zettour grunted as he did the same. “Army needs a few honest men,” he said. “Or else we’ll always be heading to battle too early.” “Shh,” Rudersdorf cut in, his hand waving their words away. “There.” It wasn’t the herd they’d been tracking. A lone chamois, munching away at its breakfast, none the wiser it was going to be tonight’s dinner. “No good,” Zettour whispered, checking through his sights. “Angle’s too low.” Wordlessly, Lehrgen took his own rifle off his shoulder and handed it to Rudersdorf. As silently as he could manage he hauled himself up onto the rock they’d ducked under, then up two more. From his stomach he shifted as far as he dared over the edge and beckoned for his gun back, then grasped for the top of the barrel as it wavered back and forth, lifted so high in Rudersdorf’s grasp he had it between fingertips. His target embalmed in the placid dream of mealtime, Lehrgen took the opportunity to adjust his setup. One chance was all he’d get before it scampered away. It lifted its head and his focus narrowed down to nothing beyond what was between notched metal, tracking minute movements as the head turned a little more, then a little more. A little more, he encouraged, one last time. The echo of the shot still rung in his ears when the animal dropped to the ground. If its death was respectful, peaceful, a graceful buckling of joints, neither struggling nor suffering, its aftermath played a cruel and final joke on the majestic creature. An undignified tumble down the slope until it hit a copse of withering alpenrose completed the picture, a clownish spectacle of flailing limbs like a cast-away toy providing a parting moment of amusement. Lehrgen lay still on the cool bed of rock, eyes the only thing moving until he memorized the resting place of his quarry in relation to his own, mentally calculating the easiest method of retrieving it. His hop down from his perch was soon followed by two congratulatory claps to the shoulder, one on either side. With repeated assurances that he needed no assistance, he cut his path across the hill alone. The borrowed knife he drew from his pack cut a sharp line through the hide, though he was careful not to pierce what lay below. As soon as the incision was large enough, hot entrails slipped out to steam in the cool air. The next part was the one he’d detested since downing his first deer in the modest woods near his home. It was better if no one bore witness to the pause he took to steel his nerves before his hands pushed through a sticky array of organs while he severed them from the carcass. As viscerally disgusting as it was necessary to preserve the meat on its way to the butcher. Trusting brisk Alpine air to leech away the remaining body heat, he wasted no time trussing the animal to carry. He picked his way through the treacherous landscape more carefully on his return, his balance threatened by the weight on his back, one slip away from meeting the same disgraceful fate he’d witnessed from afar. When their path had given way from a narrow line trampled along steep mountain to well-packed dirt winding through gentle hills speckled with fall blooms, Lehrgen had the energy to raise a second question for his advisors. “Any thoughts on the news out of Ildoa?” The sentence broke the companionable silence they’d fallen into and hung in the air while it waited for acknowledgement. Rudersdorf’s grandfatherly chuckle was the sole response for an entire minute. “I owe them a thanks,” he said after a time, looking back over his shoulder towards his guests. “For the first time I’ve come to appreciate having the Ostrians as a separate nation. The Ildoans aren’t our problem anymore.” “That’s not entirely true,” Lehrgen countered, while he shifted his cargo into a more comfortable position. “Legal status aside, if they’re attacked for being weak, are our own citizens going to write it off as unrelated? We’ll end up with a slew of crazed politicians of our own and be dragged back into a losing war before we know it.” “You’re giving southerners too much credit,” Zettour said. “It’ll be ten years before the Ildoans rally themselves to stand up, much less into forward motion. By then we’ll be on firmer ground to handle it.” Lehrgen reached up to hold a branch away from his face and nodded along. After a couple years of economic growth, fewer voters would be willing to gamble with their prosperity. “And as usual, you’re worried about things out of your control,” Rudersdorf added. “Instead of the more important question of how we’re dividing the spoils.” They argued themselves in a circle over who would pay the butcher, the one point of agreement being that splitting the cost was out of the question on the grounds of being too middle-class. By virtue of seniority, Rudersdorf settled the debate in his favor. The tenderloins would be tomorrow night’s dinner. Rudersdorf would take the large cuts, as he didn’t need to cross a border to get them home. Lehrgen and Zettour would split equal amounts of sausage after the butcher cured it for them. For making the kill, Lehrgen had earned the right to the horns, fifteen centimeters of black-brown with a hook on the end. A week later, packing his things to leave, he determined that by the time his train arrived in Anholter Bahnhof he would find a use for what he was bringing home. Otherwise, he’d have to open a storage chest in his attic and take a look at all the other relics of vacations past staring back accusingly. His meals could benefit from more variety, but weren’t so dull he’d willingly eat the same one day in and day out. At most, he wanted two sausage links for himself. Passing along a roll apiece to each of his direct superiors wouldn’t hurt him. Another would go to the family across the street who’d invited him for lunch every Sunday he’d had a day off during the war and had sent their housekeeper over with leftovers whether he accepted or no. That left two more packages of salted meat rolled in pepper and wrapped neatly in brown butcher’s paper to give to someone who didn’t fuss about their diet. Marian, he thought, recalling his promise to see her at Christmas. She enjoyed hunting more than he did, and would be glad both of the souvenir and of the opportunity to remind him of his first winning shot, the time they’d tossed stones at squirrels and he’d been inconsolable upon actually hitting one. He’d played soldier back then. Like all boys did. In his mind he’d already killed a thousand Huns and Martians and worse. He hadn’t been innocent of how meat arrived at the table. And yet, when he’d seen the rock connect and then the little thing lying there he’d sat next to it with his head between his knees until the groundskeeper had picked him up and carried him home. But that’s how children were. Full of dreams about what life could be and terror at what it actually was. Or how children are supposed to be, he corrected himself. With time, he’d learned to accept his part in the natural order of things. What he’d come to abhor was waste, senseless killing. The animal he’d downed would do better than become a piece of art on his wall. Twin bottle openers had been fashioned from the horns. Functional, in the hands of the right people. One of the pair he was obligated to send to his brother. The other he was tempted to keep for himself, even though his preferred brand of beer came sealed with a swing-top. He would have if not for his adjutant, who had returned from his own vacation with trinkets for a full quarter of the office, like a summertime Santa Claus, and whose birthday had come and gone while Lehrgen was away. That’s everyone, he told himself, checking out the window one last time to verify he wouldn’t miss anything if he closed his eyes for a nap. 
 September 25, 1930General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 Tanya put a hand to the back of her neck and rolled it side to side. There has to be an answer, she thought, trying to clear her head and look at her notes with fresh eyes. She only had a few days until General von Lehrgen was back in the office, and after that she could say goodbye to spending her time on a pet project. With her boss on vacation the previous weeks, she'd found herself in want of work. Of course, she had other projects to finish up, but with nothing new coming in she'd experienced a lull in the pace of her day. Naturally, there were peaks and troughs to any work schedule. She was happy to finally be experiencing a low, the most recent in a string of signs that her work life had returned to a healthy state. That said, she wasn’t the one on vacation. A quiet week was no excuse for fifty-odd hours sitting behind her desk with nothing but a time-card to show for it. Her time serving in the Army had given her an unwelcome taste of life during deployment. The concept of “rest” hadn’t been very popular. Over the previous year, she’d been given the chance to see how soldiers spent their time when they weren’t deployed. Taking a hard look at her findings, she could reach only one conclusion: the situation was dire. Despite the forced down-sizing, the bulk of the Imperial Army, on the average day, wasn’t required to do anything. The higher-ups had plenty of theorizing and strategizing, which explained why her schedule was consistently filled. As for the common soldier, a hefty chunk of his time went to what the business world labeled “non-value added activities.” She had nothing bad to say about a clean workspace, nor about frequent gear maintenance. At some point, though, it became obvious that a regular part of soldierly life was being assigned tasks for the sake of keeping busy. No self-respecting company would put up with this level of idle time. Thousands of years of civilization, and this was the best they could come up with? Humanity’s original sinners were none other than the pair of idiots that decided fighting to the death was an acceptable way of settling disputes. Loaning out soldiers for part-time work? Job rotations?...Volunteering? she wondered, touching her head down to her desk in defeat. There has to be a better way of doing this. Severe potential conflicts of interest made national defense one of the few services that wouldn’t benefit from being privately funded. That was no reason for the Army to ignore the lessons of successful for-profit enterprises. A privately-funded army and a privately-run army were entirely different things. Primarily, all military budgets suffered from a problem of highly inelastic demand. When you needed an army, you needed an army. The cost of its services had little to no effect on the Treasury’s willingness to pay for said services, thus, the incentive structure for optimizing utilization of non-deployed personnel was practically nonexistent. Luckily for her country, they had her. As any good student of the financial papers would know, spin-offs and divestments were the bread-and-butter of restructuring an ailing corporation into a streamlined and efficient machine. Post-war budget cuts had forced the Army to rethink some of its unnecessary expenditures. Now that the economy was turning around, good faith in adhering to their treaty was the only thing stopping it from growing back into the bloated monstrosity it had been three years ago so they could have ten times more soldiers rotating through mundane tasks. A partial solution was for her to disseminate the idea of flexible employment. The only reason an army should ever hire more permanent soldiers was for a legitimate potential need of lethal force. Not because they needed more bodies on kitchen duty or more chaplains or more people managing logistics. As a basic example, take a major fortification project. The Army could maintain a full complement of experts in-house, hire a private contractor, or some combination of the two. When the project was finished, soldier-engineers would still be there. At that point, it would be cheaper to pay them to do nothing than to devise another project for the sake of keeping them busy. Ignoring the cost of labor as a sunk cost, some improperly-educated review board would see a falsely cheap investment and get funding for that next project anyway, and there went precious Marks she’d earned taken for more tax payments. With an outside contractor, a project was over when it was over. The next one would be assessed fairly for expected cost and then sold to the lowest bidder, a market in which everyone was welcome to compete. “Hey,” she heard from her door, breaking her thoughts away from growing into a fantasy about her old life, when the departments she was restructuring didn’t function as an emergency backup squad that needed to hang around not contributing, just in case. “You looked like you could use this.” “Sauer,” she greeted, waving the bearer of two coffees closer. “Sit down for a second.” She took a sip from the cup offered to her and an explosion of flavors hit her tongue. Each one of them horribly, irredeemably bad. She placed the cup down as far away as she could get it. Rude as it might be, someone needed to take on the task of informing him he was serving up sludge. “I thought you liked it black,” he pouted. “I do. But that’s not how coffee’s supposed to taste.” “It’s all bad to me.” He shrugged and took a sip from what appeared to be coffee-flavored milk. “Never been able to drink a cup without plenty of cream or sugar.” “I guess you never met my adjutant.” “Visha?” he asked. “Of course I remember her. She was loads of fun.” Sauer doing unspeakable things to coffee was his own business, but did he have to go there? She’d never wanted a reason to go looking for her Type 95. All the work that Tanya put into turning the other woman into a competent adult, and he was going to dismiss her as a fun time? “Don’t,” she said, putting her hands up in front of her. “I don’t need to know about you and her. Or any other woman, for that matter.” “Degurechaff, no,” he said, leaning over and pushing her hands down. “You and the boss dismissed both of us to put your heads together one night and she - she always seemed so...normal. I figured she might want to talk to someone who wasn’t a soldier’s soldier, you know?” “She had me.” Sauer gave a bark of laughter to that. “Please don’t tell me you considered yourself the ordinary one of the group.” Tanya had to give a rueful smile to that. She could see how it may have been hard for Visha to complain about the battlefield to someone who belonged there less than she did. “Anyway, we wandered around and made up stories about why we were there that sounded more heroic than politicians screwing up. Stupid stuff. Defeating evil wizards and whatever. And after that, whenever our superior officers decided they wanted to argue over the exact same map for two hours, we’d do the same thing. It was relaxing. Nothing to be jealous over.” Jealous…? Tanya thought. There went that damnable rumor about her romantic life popping up again. “Don’t get the wrong idea,” she snapped. Sauer lifted his cup and sighed into it. “I’m trying not to,” he muttered. The mild disgust that tinged his face at the thought could have come from a couple sources. As she doubted he held conservative views on the topic and it was hard to imagine Visha’s participation as being the issue, that left her. While she didn’t flatter herself as ranking among the most singularly attractive members of the world’s population, she hadn’t realized her lack of excessive femininity was so repellent to the average man of the era. It wasn’t a problem necessarily, though she did have to wonder about what it meant for her future. The Army might be the easiest place to make a home for herself after all. “The reason I brought Serebryakov up is you obviously never tried the coffee she made,” Tanya clarified. “I did.” “And?” “Without cream and sugar? It was bad also.” She was going to crack a tooth if she wasn’t careful. The Type 95 wasn’t enough for a philistine who couldn’t appreciate the difference between brown acid mixed with water and a potable beverage. “I’m surprised you’re still working,” Sauer said, motioning at her papers. “I finished with everything I could think of yesterday by lunch. I’d already marked all the projects you’d been assigned as completed. Didn’t think to ask.” “They are,” she replied. “This is something I’m doing on my own. It’s why I wanted you to come in. You’re more familiar with what the Army was like before the war.” “Not really,” he said, shaking his head. “I had barely more than a year between being commissioned and the first operation in Norden.” “Still,” she said, launching into a brief explanation of the gist of her thought process. An army was always going to require the support of a substantial number of administrative and technical specialists. With the exception of a Battle of Berun, many of them would never be expected to participate directly in combat. That being the case, she had to wonder how much use it was to have them trained for it at all. Lieutenant Sauer proved to be surprisingly stubborn at making what amounted to the same objection ten separate ways. Namely, that there was a mysterious and unquantifiable difference between a civilian and a military professional doing the same job. Discipline, sense of urgency, brotherhood, courage in the case they were placed near active fighting, it all boiled down to the same argument. It wasn’t that Tanya was skeptical the Army could instill those qualities, simply that they couldn’t be sufficiently replicated outside of it by the right reward-punishment system, at least in the context of an administrative role. Sufficiently, because automatic obedience to authority wasn’t a trait anyone in this era needed to acquire unless it was absolutely necessary. It was time to try a new tactic. If she couldn’t out-argue Sauer, she had no chance of convincing anyone else. Among the other illiberal workings of the armed forces was the concept of a minimum enlistment period, currently set by outside powers at ten years. Insulating a technical role from the free flow of labor limited how much of the general population could or would want to gain the relevant skill. In the event the Army had a sudden requirement for three times the number of specialists, they had to hope they picked fast learners. “Like a reserve force,” Sauer said, finally arriving at a breakthrough. Not the way she would have put it, though that may have been a function of her extensive work experience outside the military. Given that the men she worked with didn’t have the same, the expression might serve as a useful shortcut in future discussions. “One more question before you go,” Tanya said, after her guest had finished his cup of coffee and retrieved her unwanted one. “Who does your tailoring?” The inquiry wasn’t as strange as it sounded to the modern ear. Owning enough outfits to pack a closet full was reserved for the aspiring and wealthy, which made having a good seamstress on call more of a priority. The one she used to employ had disappeared sometime around the end of the war, never to be heard from again. Regardless of Sauer’s other flaws, he took care with his appearance and she could trust him to make a good recommendation. Though, the reason she was asking him had less to do with that and more to do with convenience. She’d rather recently pieced together that they lived in the same general area. “Here,” he said, scrawling out a name and address on a scrap of paper before making an abrupt departure that left her thanking empty air. Her coworkers likely took her choice of pants over skirt to be more of a statement than she meant it to be. Truth be told, feeling comfortable was less of an issue than feeling professional. To do her best work she needed to feel professional, which meant dressing the part, and no amount of awareness that her clothing options had expanded had been enough to internalize the notion. Had her old company requested she loosen up and start wearing jeans to work, she doubted her reaction would have been much different. That being said, she was beginning to think she’d feel more professional in a skirt if her slacks weren’t going to fit properly. As she had yet to find an all-purpose, business-appropriate pair in the women’s department, she was stuck with the young men’s section. That had been fine up until the delineation between a boy’s figure and a boyish figure had grown more pronounced. She was hoping a competent seamstress could fix the suddenly malproportioned waist-hip-leg ratios so that fashion woes didn’t drag on her concentration. On that topic, she thought, turning her eyes back to mess on her desk. At the least she could throw something presentable together out of it. Unfortunately, she was still a day or two away from a marketable strategy by the time the end of the week rolled around. She couldn’t just blow off her meeting with General von Romel like he was any old coworker, so she reluctantly dragged her focus away from what she was typing to do a perfunctory sit-down. Luckily for her, the friendly chats didn’t have a tendency to last long. To her surprise, Romel seemed to have an inkling of what she was working on, the first words after he greeted her being to ask if she had any unorthodox ideas to share. She’d have to remember Sauer was not only sociable, but an incorrigible gossip. She hesitated to answer for what ended up being an uncomfortable length of time. How she was going to present her presentation had been a concern she was saving until she saw the final product. The man responsible for leading the armed forces wasn’t likely to be the most receptive audience for why grandiose dreams about a million-man standing army should remain dreams. Well, she’d faced down worse. It was better to come clean and control the messaging than let him think she was going to stab him in the back. “I’m wondering if this’ll be a bit too unorthodox for you,” she admitted, straightening up in her chair. “Try me,” Romel grinned. “What’s on your mind?” Either she had a nasty surprise waiting for her in the future or the smile was a genuine openness to new ideas. In both cases, she’d only help her cause by pitching the softball version of why this would be good for her client. It was a bit out of her wheelhouse, in all honesty. Most of her career she’d been in a position of telling departmental execs what they needed to do, not convincing them why they should agree. She cleared her throat and took a deep breath. At worst, she’d only be fired and blacklisted from anywhere Romel held influence. She’d heard the Red Women and Girls’ League had some openings in their administration. “I’ve been thinking about the future shape of the military,” she began. “How it might grow under a different paradigm than we’re accustomed to.” “You’re thinking about the growth of a military that can’t grow?” The skeptical tone asking why she was wasting his time with what happened after his tenure was over when he had pressing matters to attend to was an endemic dilemma for a company operating above capacity. It could be hard to get a manager to stop concentrating on the symptoms and treat the disease when taking the time to address structural concerns meant letting the symptoms wreak havoc in the interim. “Right,” she agreed. “Of course, legally, you’re hemmed in, which I appreciate. But that’s a bit besides the point, which is taking a fresh look things. Not what our strength is now or what it could be tomorrow, but how we define strength.” “I have a feeling I should categorically refuse to hear you out,” he sighed, leaning forwards and steepling his fingers in front of his face. “But let’s have it.” A meeting with the CEO about why the entire business model was flawed had been a bit above her pay grade. She imagined the scene was similar, the pained look of knowing it was your duty to listen to advice you didn’t want to hear. “Respectfully, I often get the sense that we’re thinking about what constitutes a military the wrong way. The size of the official enrollment number is often treated as an end in itself, when in reality it’s a means to an end.” She sat up taller in her chair after noticing she’d sunk down. Flying in the face of all previous authorities on managing national defense took a lot out of you. “What we should look at is where there might be another means to the same goal that doesn’t require a permanent inflation of your payroll.” “Private industry,” Romel said, giving her a single nod. Getting on the same page so quickly was a welcome surprise. “You aren’t the first to mention the possibility. I don’t see it working out, there’s a difference between how military and civilian personnel are treated-” “Think of it like building a reserve force,” she suggested, interrupting before she could catch herself. “In a way.” He paused and stared at her, then gave a long sigh, evidently having a hard time processing that she’d had the nerve to interject in the middle of his sentence. “I got that part,” he continued. “And even were I interested in trying to get a program of less restrictive hiring started, which I’m not saying I am, civilians employed by the Army are capped at the number we had before the war. I can’t dismiss from here to start hiring over there.” There was a certain irony to the world’s bastions of capitalism stymying her attempts at promoting capitalism that didn’t go lost on her. The real issue would be Romel himself. Given his lack of enthusiasm for opening his world to civilians it may have been a lost cause, but if her life in the Empire had taught her one thing, it was how to avoid admitting defeat for as long as possible. “Ultimately, the aim would be to hire companies, not individuals,” Tanya clarified. “That way, the administrative details never need to cross your desk.” A side-effect of the command and control mentality meant that the Army hired any civilian support staff directly. It also meant that there was a loophole where the budget itself wasn’t restricted, only the number of people being paid. Whether that was a legal person or a natural person nobody had bothered to define. The larger hurdle would be in convincing a man with thirty-odd years of service under his belt that his institution didn’t own the rights to effective teamwork. To that end, she spent a few minutes reassuring him that having a middleman didn’t mean he couldn’t set standards for how the companies operated, though the usefulness of having accountants able to snap to attention was highly debatable. With the glut of former service members, it wasn’t an issue he needed to worry about for the time being anyway. “I wouldn’t want anything suspicious in the budget,” Romel countered. She couldn’t help a short huff of laughter from escaping her throat. First, that Romel was so concerned with maintaining his public image that the mere shadow of illegitimacy was enough to derail an innocuous realignment. Second, at his naive conviction that some underpaid bureaucrats armed with pencil and paper were equal to the task of auditing a government budget. Oh, to have her innocence back. Romel seemed mildly curious when she mentioned as much in response to his question of what was so funny, even going so far as to inquire how easily funds could disappear, in case he ever took an interest in doing something about it. She wouldn’t want to be the bureaucrat there when the highest-ranked general in the Army demanded you show him your books. “Well, since you’re so passionate about it, if you’d like to write up a list of what positions we could explain filling as non-military, I’ll hold onto it for reference,” Romel grudgingly acceded. “But careful with the terminology you use. Please.” She’d admit she got carried away at a few points. It had been years since she’d been lent a willing ear to describe the pitfalls of line-item budgeting and what the alternatives were. She may have used some unpolitic language to describe other quarters of the government. Romel did have to work with those people. At the end of the day, she didn’t feel too guilty. Another citizen educated on the shortcomings of the public sector was never a bad thing. All in all, it was a successful end to her week. xXx It had been a busy fall for Erwin von Romel. He returned from holiday to a mountain of paperwork. The Communist party led a failed uprising in Sachsony, tying up plenty of his time without requiring military intervention, which somehow made it worse. The ambassador from Dacia wanted to know if they’d sell old blueprints, which was a no. The commission for transitioning the Lowlands to independence wanted his opinion on their proposed military strength, which was depressing since it was larger than his own. His favorite aunt died. Busy, busy, and busier, he shouldn’t have been caught wasting his time adding more work to his plate, except he hadn’t known when else he’d next get the chance to summon Degurechaff to his office while she wasn’t under the influence of whatever drug Lehrgen was feeding to her that kept her so complacent. The single most annoying trait of his newest general had to be that his view on what constituted military virtue tended to surface exclusively at the most inconvenient times possible. He didn’t play the saint until he did, and when he did it was never when anyone else wanted him to, like when he turned out to be surprisingly effective at trimming the claws of the Empire’s most vicious predator. Lehrgen should try out Romel’s method for a change. Virtuous but very willing to listen to an argument of why he shouldn’t be. In the interest of a balanced worldview, Degurechaff was supposed to be the one giving him those reasons. Everyone needed a devil on their shoulder. For the first time in his memory, he’d seen her nervous. She, a major, had repudiated him, a lieutenant general, to his face the first time they’d met. It was a bit cute. The nervous part, not the having his judgement questioned by a twelve-year-old part. It hadn’t taken long to see the reason behind the anxiety. She had come to discuss a gross violation of the law. Romel had been worried over nothing. Lehrgen hadn’t gotten the upper hand yet. She’d learned to retract the claws when not in use, but they were as sharp as ever. The idea of using a private company as a convenient structure to pay a literal company of soldiers wasn’t exactly an original one. What none of them could figure their way around was how to explain that if the wrong eyes got a look at the budget. And wouldn’t you know, according to Degurechaff they were only a corrupt and or friendly Minister of the Interior away from doing precisely whatever the hell they wanted without much traceability. All they were missing was an off-the-radar place to stash equipment, and you’d never know they’d lost a war. What was a zero-based budgeting system? His eyes had glazed over somewhere in there, so he couldn’t tell you. But he knew someone who could, along with every conceivable way a pfennig of tax money could disappear. It was scary how Degurechaff got when she put her mind to something. He’d thought about calling Zettour. Then he’d thought better of it. The old bosses had taken it as a personal affront that they’d lost the first and only world war. He wasn’t in the mood to argue about why he didn’t want his legacy to be Siphoned Off Money For Schoolchildren To Fund Massive Illegal Army. He’d run a little experiment using his own budget just to see how it worked. There was never a thing as too many options, and Degurechaff had done her duty in showing him what they were. That was all. There were days it was nice to feel like he wouldn’t be saddled with his sorry lot forever. When her report on which jobs they could play around with had shown up on his desk this morning, he’d flipped through to make sure there were no repeats of calling a spade a spade. Thankfully, the term “reserve force” hadn’t made it into the document anywhere. He’d locked the thing up anyway. It would be admissible in court as a reason to declare her not of sound mind. She’d gotten carried away with her disguise. Selling an army off piecemeal like that sounded like an idea from a universe that had confused profiteering with patriotism. xXx After she’d had a weekend to rest, Tanya’s next challenge came in the form of General von Lehrgen. Passing a report up the ladder and over his head would do her no favors. She wasn’t really looking forward to another hour spent debating the topic when the final boss had given her preliminary consent to move forward with it. Lehrgen had a softer touch, but in some ways he was a tougher opponent. She had no illusions that the most ambitious version of her proposal would be met with a round of applause. It wasn’t meant to be. Putting the more far-reaching changes on the table served to make the minor ones reasonable by comparison. And who knew? Maybe one day someone would take the entire document seriously, though she doubted it. Twenty-first century politicians who otherwise extolled the virtues of the free market had generally remained silent on the subject of the defense-spending sacred cow. She cracked her neck twice, once on each side, and pushed open the door to Lehrgen’s office. “Get up to anything while I was gone?” he asked, as soon as she’d had the chance to sit down. “Yes, actually.” She took the folio out from her bag and tossed it on the table between them. If her boss wasn’t going to waste any time bragging about his vacation, she wasn’t going to waste any pretending to care. “I don’t mind waiting while you look it over.” In the interim, she picked up a copy of the weekly Army gazette to browse. She was pulled from breaking her personal eye-roll record fifteen minutes later by the sound of her name. There was no need to look up to know she’d see a frown. Lehrgen’s tendency to hang on to the middle syllable was more pronounced the more questions she had to answer. The reaction was in line with her expectations for the initial reception of a paper explaining why bigger wasn’t always better. “I see you think our soldiers spend too little time being soldiers,” she heard, as she was putting the magazine back down. “Only pointing out that when we have the opportunity to grow, we shouldn’t lose sight of the Army’s basic focus,” she countered. “A soldier’s core function is as an agent of violence.” “That’s one way of putting it.” A simple change of terminology could be surprisingly effective in making a convincing argument. Asking how many people they needed “defending the nation” might have a more pleasant ring to it, but speaking in euphemisms hid the ugly truth. Phrasing it in starker terms got to the root of the question faster - how many people prepared to kill at a moment’s notice did a peaceful country require to remain at peace? “Well, if you look at it that way, you’ll see there’s opportunities to move certain support functions to a third party, which will give us more hiring flexibility,” she explained. For her trouble, she received a crease brow in response. “So we gain flexibility at the expense of a smaller Army? I’m...forgive me, but I’m confused on where you’re going with this.” She winced at the suspicious tone. He’d hit the nail bluntly on the head. So much for hoping the logical approach of cost-consciousness would find broad appeal among the leadership of what was formerly Europa’s largest army. “I’d call it more responsive to the needs of the moment,” she said, still dimly hopeful she could get him on her side. “I hear you on the phone over budgetary matters all the time. I was only trying to help.” “That’s...nice of you,” he grumbled, in a clear struggle to find a way to compliment her for making what he considered an enormous mistake and settling on the most meaningless word available. His demeanor visibly reset itself towards conciliation. “No harm in another perspective. So long as you stay on this sort of track with work, I’ll do my best as support.” “I’m still not sure it’s where my true calling lies,” Tanya deflected. There was no rush to provide a definitive answer to whether she could see herself as a proper General Staff officer. “I know,” Lehrgen sighed. “But for what it’s worth.” “One last thing before we move on,” she said. If they were going to discuss her future, she’d thrown in a handy tidbit. “On page seven, I put a recommendation for a permanent advisory board of industry experts. I’d discussed the other ideas with Romel before I wasted time typing it up, but if you don’t mind giving this one some attention? Getting interviewers to come to you was a far more efficient method of job hunting than the other way around. It was a long shot to think she’d be invited to sit in on the meetings, but there was always a chance run-in. “I’ll see where I can get with it,” Lehrgen promised. She wasn’t against a little positive reinforcement when it was deserved. One good deed for another. “How was your vacation?” Tanya asked, leaning her chin to rest on one of her hands. “Good. Thanks for asking. Restful. I slept until eight-thirty. Twice.” She didn’t have to fake her laughter at that summation. The discreet gloating session she’d volunteered for had turned into something else entirely. It was both a terribly nondescript review and exactly the type of reply she used to give inquiring coworkers. “What is this world coming to?” she joked. “And now I get to turn around and take another train ride to the Ruhr,” he said. “You ready to leave Thursday?” Scoring a guided visit to the industrial heartland had been another recent coup. Although the arms trade wasn’t her first choice of employment, it was a choice. Morality aside, were her country’s course to take a turn for the familiar, she wouldn’t want her signature authorizing the turning of the Imperial war engine. Still, it wasn’t a bad introduction to make. “Will we have any time to see the city?” she asked, curious. The irony of her life as a mage was that she’d seen the majority of Europa from the air, and almost none of it from the ground. “Essin? It’s industrial, so don’t expect too much, but we’ll have some of Saturday free. I was going to head over to Dortemund. The same train comes through on the way to Berun.” She was happy to trust Lehrgen’s judgment on tourist destinations. For once, it was nice to feel like the burden of planning a logical itinerary didn’t fall on her. During her college years, her own diligence had been the only reason group outings didn’t begin with arriving then wasting half a day deciding what to do. “Do you mind if I tag along?” “If you showed up at lunch, I have a feeling I wouldn’t get much catching up done,” he said, shaking his head. “My mother grew up there. I haven’t seen those cousins since before I went to Londinium, so twelve years, give or take. Seemed rude not to mention I’d be in the area.” “Oh. Sorry,” Tanya apologized. “The thought hadn’t occurred to me.” In both her lifetimes, the general rule seemed to be that failing to make brief contact with long-lost friends or relatives when you got within a certain physical distance of them was something of a slight, no matter how long ago the relationship had atrophied. Personally, she found the opposite to be true. Combining trips for convenience was one thing; adding someone as an afterthought to a trip you’d already planned was another. A touch of pity for having the courage to avoid over-indulging in nostalgia crossed her boss’s gaze. “I’m sure one of them knows what Essin has to offer,” he said. “I’ll get some recommendations for you.” As promised, she was handed the local short-list upon arrival to the train station, and a few hours later the title-holder for her least-scenic field trip no longer belonged to the fourth-grade class visit to Tokyo’s largest recycling center. By and large, the immense complex was no longer equipped to build armaments. Like any good capitalist, the owner had followed where the market led and refocused on consumer goods. Currently, the paltry handful of machines dedicated to less-economically friendly pursuits weren’t in operation, meaning that the building was functioning as a storage shed for spare parts. Along one wall ran a display of former alumni, model-sized figurines giving a visual history of heavy arms culminating in a full-sized replica of their latest howitzer. Tanya reached out to lay her hand on the cold metal. She hadn’t had the chance to get up close and personal with her battlefield Lord and Savior in some time. If she just closed her eyes she could- “Degurechaff,” rang sharply through the air moments later. She retracted her hand with a smile of apology. With Lehrgen occupied by some initial formalities, she’d wandered off on her own. “I’m only here rounding out my education,” he continued. “The active parts of the plant might be more interesting. I’m sure someone could take you around.” Much as she didn’t like being treated as the child sent off to playtime because she couldn’t keep her hands off the museum pieces, she happily allowed a volunteer to lead her away. What could she say? The durable goods sector suited her tastes better. The company covered it well, but after a behind-the-scenes glimpse she could see they weren’t making the profits they were used to. In fact, they may not have been making a profit at all. For all the famed efficiency of Imperial factories, it was clear they hadn’t quite figured out how to operate when products weren’t flying off the shelves. If there was one thing she didn’t want, it was rich industrialists joining hands with a political party promising to protect their interests by bringing an old cash cow back into vogue. “Could I get your contact information?” Tanya asked her docent, sensing it was nearing end-of-day by the increasing frequency of glances at the clock. With a nod, the nearest clerk was promptly located for pen and paper. “I need some time, but I’ll put a few suggestions together,” she said, after she’d gotten her first legitimate corporate contact that was all her own. She couldn’t regurgitate her education on process management at the drop of a hat, especially since she’d be adapting it from the service sector. With enough weekends, she was sure she could kick the dust off that part of her memories. “If...if you’d like…” She wasn’t going to let a none of your business attitude dissuade her. A peaceful future was very much her business. “Our country needs companies like this if we’re going to fight our way back to our old selves,” she said, letting her praise lean on the pride the man no doubt felt as a worker in the country’s economic backbone. “I’d be honored to contribute what I can.” “I wouldn’t want to take you away from your work.” “My work is to serve the Fatherland,” Tanya said, falling back on a patriotic standby to allay an employer’s natural wariness over someone pursuing hobbies on company time. “I’m glad you’re on our side,” he said, reaching out to pat her shoulder. She appreciated the sentiment, even if she didn’t agree. She’d much rather have been born in the States. “Where’s dinner?” Tanya asked, after she’d rendezvoused with the rest of her party. “Nothing fancy,” Lehrgen said. “A really classic Imperial place.” The news punctured a hole in her high. Standard work-trip etiquette was to partake in group meals, leaving her no graceful way to bow out. Call her crazy, but at times like this, she sometimes wondered if her boss had it out for her. xXx Hahh, Erich von Lehrgen sighed, settling into his seat across from his adjutant after finding the right compartment of the train. There were reasons he hadn’t seen his mother’s cousins in over a decade. He gave himself a moment of respite and then called the third member of their group away from staring out the window. “I got a notice this morning,” he said. He pulled out a cigarette to light, then gave one to Ernst as well when he motioned for it. “Serebryakov is up for release. I put in a request to be the attending officer so you can be there as well.” “Thanks. I do appreciate it, sir," Tanya said quietly, actually looking mildly touched by the gesture, the slight smile on her face one with real warmth behind it. "Don't mention it," he muttered. It was a glimpse into the rarest side of Tanya. When she was what a person was supposed to be. Whether that was an act or accidental was the question he asked himself every day. “When is it?” “November 11th.” “How ironic,” she scoffed. Before he could ask where the irony was, Ernst had reached under his seat and pulled out three brown bottles. One was tossed across the aisle to Lehrgen, another passed to Tanya. “Then we have a reason for a drink,” his adjutant cheered, a familiar bottle-opener coming out next. “I’ve never seen a horn like this,” Tanya said, dangling it on her finger in the golden beam of sunset light streaming through the window while she inspected. “Where’d you get it?” “Birthday present,” Ernst said. “From-” Temporarily distracted, Tanya didn’t catch the desperate hand Lehrgen drew across his throat. In his list of souvenir recipients, he’d forgotten her. He should’ve picked up chocolates at the train station before he left. Worse, he’d made no acknowledgement of her birthday. He didn’t need to give her reason to go asking around why Ernst got a present and she didn’t. Next year, he’d rectify the mistake. “-from my girlfriend,” Ernst continued, eyebrows dancing so suggestively Lehrgen had to take a sip of beer to prevent himself from bursting with laughter. “Which one?” Tanya asked, handing the item back to its owner. “The one I spend the most time with.” “What’s so special about that one?” “Let’s see,” Ernst said, raising a hand to tick a list off his fingers. “She’s always telling me what to do. She refuses to wear makeup. She can be pretty judgmental about how I spend my money. And she doesn’t like having fun as much as she used to.” “Sauer, you don’t have a girlfriend,” Tanya sniggered, as Lehrgen crossed his arms and nodded along, you tell him echoing through his mind. Of the two of them, it was plain to see Ernst was the girlfriend of their relationship. “You have a wife.” In all probability, he and Ernst were choking on their drinks for different reasons. One out of humor and one not so much. Why am I getting her a present again? 




 

 What's in a name?






 
 "No good deed goes unpunished."
 
 
 November 11, 1930Free City of Dantzig
 It was the cold he noticed first. For a few seconds, Erich von Lehrgen could register nothing more, nerves shaken by a second time taking flight stiffening as soon as he stepped out of the plane. November mornings in Berun that dawned clear and sunny, when the crisp-cold air hovered no more than a drop of mercury above zero, were his favorite harbinger of winter. Every year, he sent up a prayer to anyone listening to arrange it so a walk home from the bar under a dreary drizzle wasn't the note on which his birthday ended. Most years, he woke up to muddy bootprints tracked through the house and wondered, again, why he'd never asked his mother if you were supposed to apologize to the housekeeping service for that sort of thing. He figured the extra bill he left on the table got the point across. That morning, the world had seen fit to offset the cheery sunlight with wind. Their proximity to the sea meant it brought along with it a damp, bone-deep chill, which in turn brought with it his memories of the darkest January days growing up as far north and east as the Empire went. There were more reasons than one that he'd been happy to move away for work. Somebody had to supervise the prisoner swap. He'd volunteered under the assumption the day would be predictably dull, gray skies and unremarkable temperature. In the case of a light drizzle, cap and trench coat would suffice. What he had not volunteered for was to spend a few hours pretending he hadn't noticed the cold until someone else mentioned it, and definitely wasn't shivering, purely for the benefit of the person following him off the plane muttering uncouth expletives at the weather. From anyone else, he would expect an additional thank you for being made to suffer through the cold as a favor, which he'd duly insist was unnecessary. As far as Tanya went, he had his doubts she could understand gratitude on anything deeper than an academic level. That, at least, was what he'd gathered on one of his countless train rides, seated for hours in the dining car sipping away at wine opposite a doctor he'd bothered for something to help him stay awake. It had been back when the name Tanya Degurechaff floated across his papers for the second time, after she'd won the Silver Wings. Out of some morbid curiosity he'd prodded his dinnermate on the subject of children with a decidedly unchildlike propensity for calculating and inflicting the maximum possible amount of violence allowable, studiously avoiding the mention of a name. What he'd really wanted to know was if children grew out of disturbing tendencies the way they did out of most everything else. He hadn't gotten the answer he wanted, only a handful of regretted recollections dripped out in pieces over a third bottle of Médoc - the times had still been good, then - of patients that the doctors of the world were powerless to fix. The man had been several times more interested in expounding upon the apparently lively debate in the medical-scientific community as to whether that was because of a flaw in their treatments or a flaw in the patient than he had been in providing helpful suggestions. He hadn't even gotten around to prescribing anything to ward off sleepiness. A few of his stories had helped, though. For all the ways the good doctor had described personalities akin to Tanya Degurechaff's in worryingly accurate detail, the one-to-one match Lehrgen had once seen was gone. For starters, to the best of his knowledge, she'd passed an entire year without reducing a coworker to tears. If nothing else, he was there today in the hopes that rewarding good behavior could motivate her to do the right things for the wrong reasons. Admittedly, it was a small thing. But Tanya making a personal entreaty to the Ispagnan ambassador on behalf of her former adjutant had marked the first time he'd seen her go out of her way to help at her own expense. Guaranteeing her a few hours of bittersweet reunion on the train ride back before Viktoriya went off to start the rest of her life was only fair. Closure on the chapter of their lives titled The Great War would be good for both women. For different reasons. Encouraging one of the precious few normal traits Tanya had ever shown and getting a field trip away from the office for himself had seemed like a sound plan, back when he'd first conceived of the notion. Huddled over a steaming cup of coffee for what little warmth it provided, it no longer felt like such a good bargain. On second thought, he wanted to be cozied up under a thick blanket of paperwork at the earliest possible convenience. When Lehrgen returned from introducing himself to his Federation counterpart, Tanya was waiting for him, precision-spell-guided killjoy of a conversation starter and all. "I wish I was still in the Army," came the lament. Thank you, Lieutenant Colonel Obvious, he thought, mood no longer good enough to chance opening his mouth to see what came out. "Then I could order someone with better gloves than me to trade," she continued, holding out fingers protected by nothing more than a thin layer of leather. "At least your hair covers your ears," he grumbled back. No amount of tilting his hat was quite enough to keep his own from freezing. "I'd bet every man here is jealous." Her free hand jerked upwards almost reflexively to brush it off her face at the mention, an uncharacteristically self-conscious reaction to the mess the wind had made of it. The smug smile that followed was more like her. "You have," he gestured, swiping at his left cheek now that he could see where this morning's newspaper ink found a second home, followed by the perpetually awkward correction of "n-no, the other," when she copied him with her left hand instead of mirroring with her right. "Thanks," she said, getting it right this time, "for not - you know, the other week Mrs. Schuster just reached over and wiped it off for me, like I'm still…" Her words drifted off in a huff that sent white trails swirling with an incongruous daintiness through the air. Perhaps their commendably brave part-time file clerk and office grandmother, Mrs. Schuster, or someone else who wasn't him, would one day tell Tanya that her habit of puffing out her cheeks when annoyed somewhat detracted from her quest to be considered a full-grown adult. "If it makes you feel any better, she does it to me too." "I'm surprised she can reach," Tanya laughed. "By now, I think I'm taller than she is." Lehrgen gave an echoing chuckle. "You ready to see what kind of shape everyone's in?" he asked when it faded, for lack of anything else to do during the wait for the agreed-upon hour. "I think I've seen worse than you," she answered with a shrug. "And anyway, it's been two years. We aren't going to be seeing any festering wounds." "That might not be the case," he sighed. For days, he'd spent an hour or more agonizing over how to give Tanya the news. For weeks and then months he'd procrastinated, always with the excuse that it wasn't a good time, until finally, he'd simply forgotten she didn't know, only to remember now, after it was too late to pretend it was nothing. He'd known from the moment he told Tanya that Viktoriya was alive that his statement should rightly have included a qualification. Alive but. Alive but injured, alive but not the same, alive but spent days wishing she weren't. If he had more confidence in his ability to manage her volatile streak, he'd have told her months ago the same information that he'd been briefed on - alive but in what condition, we don't know. Ispagna had been allowed to act as negotiator, but never allowed in to view the camps themselves. In contrast to how all the rest of them did it - bringing a neutral observer to the best-run camp, staging photos of prisoners playing cards and eating meals, in general, making surrender seem an attractive option - the Federation hadn't bothered trying to pretend they took care of their wartime charges. He knew he couldn't be the only man there who'd shielded someone, a wife, a daughter, a mother, a sister, from the truth. His reasons for doing so were, he could only assume, more or less the exact opposite. Imagining that Tanya had the power to materially change the situation would overstate what any single person could accomplish. Imagining that a fit of patriotic fervor might make her want to try wasn't much of a stretch when compared against some of her more daring feats. This one he didn't see her making it out of alive. Regardless of that consideration, had he told her earlier, the most likely outcome would have been complete and utter indifference. The same unblinking nods she'd given during their first major briefings on the Western Front's casualty statistics, like she'd never for the life of her be able to understand why no one else couldn't brush them off the same way. All telling her would have done was quash his tentative hope that there was another side to Tanya, one he could grow to approve of, maybe even admire under the right conditions. The woman in question had turned to look at him expectantly after his admission. "They never let anyone in to inspect the camps," he told her, staring down into his coffee cup. "What else have you heard?" she asked, sharp and insistent. "Nothing," he muttered, "and that's the issue. For all we know they've been living in a communal paradise for the last two years, but in my experience, no news is bad news." "May I ask why you didn't say anything before today, sir?" she ground out, chewing on the last word like she wanted to spit it out. "I forgot you didn't know." "And how would I have known?" she pressed, her tone all the ruder for the fact that she'd backed it down just enough that he couldn't accuse her of sounding flippant, as though he wasn't smart enough to see through it. While he hadn't necessarily assumed anyone else had told her, it wasn't outside the realm of possibility. He was hardly the only person she spoke to at the office. Despite herself, Tanya had come to form what he hesitated to describe as friendships, perhaps companionable relationships was the better phrase, with a handful of the officers. He couldn't be entirely surprised it had happened. A basic level of intellect came with the territory of staff officer. Political connections helped, but nobody was there solely because of a family name. Tanya having a stricter idea of what constituted competence than the pickiest perfectionist Lehrgen had ever run across hadn't prevented her from finding a few people she didn't try her damndest to avoid chatting with. However much he told himself it was healthy for her to develop good working relationships beyond their own, the occasional worry nagged at the back of his mind. He wanted to believe there was a decent side to Tanya if you dug deep enough. That didn't mean he was near to forgetting about all she'd done to prove there wasn't. If his worst fears about her were true, she was already gaining allies for the time when she was in a position to lead the Imperial Army in the direction she wanted it to go. As it was hard to qualify any one thing as the "main" problem with Tanya, he could only say that a relatively innocent-seeming item was as dangerous as all the rest: anyone who believed in Tanya followed her with an almost fanatical devotion. Her battalion would have marched behind her straight into Hell. In fairness, if Lehrgen had to name a person capable of waging that campaign successfully, it would be her. Her irate glare made him miserably conscious of the drawn-out silence that had descended while he ruminated on how to explain his very intentional oversight. "I thought Romel might have said something," he finally mumbled out. "And it didn't seem worth giving you something else to worry over." The display of guilt placated her enough to relax her subtly threatening posture and release the angry breath she'd been holding, the long exhale accompanied by knuckles rubbing at a bowed forehead. "This is because of what you saw at that funeral, isn't it?" A mocking voice - an Oh, yes, why be angry about one thing? Please, add a second, unrelated one I can't remember - told her in his head what he dared not say out loud. The second he overplayed his hand, she'd leave for greener pastures. Namely, a position directly under their Chief of Staff. "You caught me in a bad moment," she forged on, heedless of the bewildered stare he sent her way. "Now you think I'm so pathetic I can't hear bad news. That was an extraordinary circumstance. It won't happen again." By the time she gave a closing sniff of indignation, his memories were catching up, the only one that stood out those few lonely tears that had marred an otherwise bored face during the state funeral that had marked the end of their Empire. To his recollection, beyond the dumbfounded It can cry? his only other thought had been a cynical guess that those tears were mourning the end of the war, not the end of millions of lives. He was no longer so sure, though there were days he longed for the simplicity of the time when he was. Given the passingly normal year she'd had, he'd allow there was a chance she cried for the same reasons all the rest of them did. For the same reasons she was here to see Viktoriya instead of shrugging it off in favor of work. "You're a young woman, Tanya," he reminded her gently, to assuage the insane-even-for-her worry that briefly joining in with the full three-quarters of the room that had been openly grieving would make him think less of her. "There's nothing wrong with crying at a funeral." For a moment, he couldn't place her reaction to what he'd thought was reassurance. He'd seen what her anger looked like, her disappointment, her hate, exasperation, even defeat. It took careful consideration of the mouth left partially open in surprise, the furrowed brow and wide eyes full of betrayal to realize he'd offended her. Another second ticked by before the reason behind it clicked. He'd breached standard decorum between officers. She was upset he'd reminded her she wasn't one. There was a familiarity to first names. One that tended to develop between people who'd known each other the better part of a decade, even unwillingly, when giving advice person-to-person, not superior-to-subordinate. But then, she was used to being treated as the exception. The automatic dismissal - it's not the end of the world, don't make such a big deal of it - died in his throat. He couldn't absolve himself of all hypocrisy, but telling her to get over it when the mere thought of her addressing him as "Erich" sent claws raking up his spine made her response mild in comparison. A thousand pointless ways to reroute the conversation away from acknowledging the slip bubbled up. The bitterness of the coffee, the unusual cold, that annoying twitch one of the other officer's eyelids had been doing the entire plane ride. While he stood there debating with himself over how to exit the conversation gracefully, Tanya did so literally, moving so quickly she was a meter away by the time he'd noticed. In disbelief, he witnessed an event most considered impossible while he watched her pour her drink out like an offering to the frozen patch of grass - Tanya having standards for coffee. "I didn't think they made coffee too bitter for you," he commented, once she'd returned, too curious over what had caused the change to remain silent like he'd planned. "My pulse is already going fast enough," she replied, after an awkward laugh. She's worried about other people, Lehrgen repeated to himself, over and over in wonder. There is hope for Tanya. Maybe, maybe she was angry about hearing the conditions of their prisoners, only angry, but he didn't think that was it. He'd seen her miffed and indignant and infuriated and in the most literal sense out for blood, and he'd never seen her refuse coffee. The evidence was more than ample she didn't suffer upset stomachs from that spectrum of emotions. Unless he had it all backwards, it was feelings of a different sort she was having trouble processing. A spot of warmth at the breakthrough took the edge off the dual indignities of cold and the unwelcome realization it had been complacency, not contempt, bred out of deepening familiarity with the most dangerous person to ever cross his path. He glanced to his right and down, where Tanya's own breath swirled with each exhale, standing so motionless that it was the only sign she hadn't frozen into a statue. He wondered if she was fighting the same desire he was, to stamp feet or rub hands together, or even to break rank for no reason other than to wander aimlessly as a way of generating some heat. A hand reached into a deep pocket to draw out matches and cigarettes. Lehrgen took one of each from their respective packages, leaving the cigarette dangling from his mouth as he struck the match against the coarse edge of the book. The wind whipped through and claimed the flame before he could put it to use. With a noise of frustration, he tossed the now useless splinter of wood aside and tried again. It was only on his fourth attempt that the whoosh of a successful light wasn't extinguished as soon as he heard it. The choice vulgarity that had been waiting on his tongue, the same one Tanya had bit out as they left the plane, died before it made its way out, inhaled with the same breath he used to get the burn going at the end of the cigarette and swallowed in a puff of smoke. Two draws, two long, grateful inhales, two slow exhales and the slight calm that accompanied an indulgence in the small vice began smoothing over re-frayed nerves. He'd lit the cigarette mostly to help pass the time, but the mild buzz didn't hurt. Neither did the extra bit of warmth, however small. Pack nearly back in his pocket, his hand stilled. Don't be rude, he lectured himself, when he realized he'd failed to offer the same boon he was now enjoying to his companion because he was avoiding conversation with her. He'd never known Tanya to smoke, but then again, there was plenty he didn't know about her. It was common courtesy to at least ask. On a day like today, someone who didn't make a habit of it would still be grateful for the favor. Before he could turn to see if she'd like one, she was on the move. Four steps, and she'd transferred from right side to left, and now stood upwind of him, a crinkled nose marring her face. Fine then, he thought, taking another puff and blowing it out further than was strictly necessary. If it bothers her that much, she can always say something. Gaze returning forward and in search of a distraction, he looked across the tarmac to the Federation's soldiers. Without a doubt, they were dealing with the cold better. Their winter uniforms were made for temperatures worse than today's, and only a few of them looked uncomfortably stiff. There was a marked difference in professionalism between the two armies, visible to anyone who spared a glance both ways. The Imperial soldiers may have been frozen half to death, but they stood in position. The Federation's men were a more undisciplined bunch. They roamed around at will, so far from an ordered grouping that he could feel the sting of insult roiling off the Imperial line, so thoroughly disrespected they weren't worth taking up positions against. The wait began to grow interminable, as though time itself had frozen solid out on the desolate open plain, leaving them all to wait for an hour that would never come. Random gusts of arctic wind blew through every couple of minutes, as if to remind them nature was a crueler enemy than the men across the way. After another half hour, a great shuffling of feet began on the Federation's side, the men finally forming up into a semblance of a line, and the Imperial soldiers could finally move warm blood into stiff muscles as they formed a tighter cordon on their own side, opening space for their captives to come through. The number of men present attested to how badly the two countries distrusted each other, how little the wounds had healed in the intervening years. His side had good reason - how could they assume communists would operate with the barest modicum of common sense? They'd begun a war randomly, waged it haphazardly, written its conclusion overzealously. What did we ever do to you? Lehrgen wondered idly, to men whose ruler once shared blood with his. Never had the Empire done something to justify the suspicion they got from the rest of the world. Oh, that's right, he sighed, moments later, eyes falling back to the woman next to him. Someone couldn't resist causing chaos when she'd only been sent to do a fly-by. Surprisingly, the Federation hadn't been the one calling for a summary execution as terms of surrender, Tanya an unimportant and uncared for detail, a symptom of the imperialist-capitalist disease, not a problem herself. It was the Republic who never forgot their grudge against her. He didn't believe their negotiating party ever seriously considered demanding capital punishment, mostly on account of her age, with some additional consideration for her gender. That didn't mean their western neighbors had lacked for vengeful officers stridently arguing in favor of it. What had come out of the aftermath was a new standard for culpability when carrying out inhumane orders. The weight of being the person for whom new international criminal legislation had been drafted rested very lightly on Tanya's shoulders, from his observations. Regardless of the comparatively lenient attitude the Rus took with her, he and Tanya stood towards the back, nearer to the trains than anything. It would be best if she received as little notice as possible, so he'd kept her behind a thick wall of Imperial uniforms. A single man, pride still wounded after seeing the statue of his leader blown to bits and recognizing the slight blonde woman as the perpetrator, would be all it took for the tinderbox to explode. In preternatural silence, the Empire released their relatively small number of captives, and the first Germanian prisoners walked from an empty plane hangar, four abreast, their boots the only sound as they crossed from Federation to Imperial control. Quietly and calmly, their names were verified and they were shown to a seat on the train, where a blanket and small snack awaited them, courtesy of tireless volunteers. A fraction of the tension eased out, and from there an orderly and smooth line of men made their way from one side to another, registering themselves with the attending soldiers and boarding the trains that would take them home. The prisoners weren't in as bad a shape as Lehrgen had feared. That said, everyone was dressed for winter, so injuries any place other than the face would be practically invisible. Too many of them had haunted eyes that spoke of what they'd endured, and there were some who had difficulty walking, limping across with no help other than the men beside them. Whether that was from a previous injury or was due to one inflicted during the duration of their stay in the Federation was impossible to know at a glance. An easy thirty centimeters taller than Tanya, Lehrgen spotted Viktoriya first. As soon as he saw the older woman, the slight regret he'd felt earlier in the day at having allowed Tanya to attend bloomed and grew tenfold. Had he known it might truly disturb her to see Viktoriya harmed, that it could elicit more of a reaction than a disheartened sigh, he wouldn't have brought her. A meeting like this, with bad blood on each side, wasn't a place for emotions. The instant his eyes found Viktoriya, it was obvious that something was off. He'd first noticed her because she was slowing down the procession. She leaned heavily on two others, unable to walk without ample help, and even with it slow and halting in her movements. Lehrgen's heart went out to her, but for all he knew she'd injured her spine falling from the sky. It would be premature to accuse the Federation of having harmed her. He could only hope that Tanya realized the same. No matter where the fault lay, at this point it wasn't helpful to concentrate on anything but the future. The Empire could boast what was arguably the most advanced scientific research staff in the world. The Commonwealth was their only true competition for that title, though the Unified States was fast catching up. Add to that the fact that Viktoriya was a mage, and one with a store of mana well above average, and there was no reason to think her prognosis was dire. The only real trouble the medical team would face in putting her back to rights was in how long it had been since the initial injury occurred. If treatment began soon after, mages could recover from near-fatal wounds back to perfect health within a few weeks, and in the case of immediate treatment often needed no more than a few hours and a good sleep. Tanya herself was a testament to that. He'd read the report on her extensive injuries after she self-destructed in Norden, and he doubted a single scar remained to remember them by. Perhaps Viktoriya would never again be light on her feet, but there was no reason to think she would need assistance for the rest of her life. She'd need it for a few months, a few years at most, but in time could be as independent as she wished. The physical impairment wasn't what worried him. What worried him was the vacant stare on her face. What had caused it was something he'd never be able to ask, at least not directly. None of the imagined scenarios were pleasant, and certain ones were unmentionable. Before today, he'd yet to see anything he'd describe as sympathy or compassion from Tanya. How deep it ran was anyone's guess. Privately, he congratulated himself for his foresight in maneuvering around Elya's bosses to have her next few weeks be spent in Berun. Tanya caught sight of her friend moments later. Maybe I should give her more credit, Lehrgen thought, watching her reaction. "No," she said, with evident distress, repeating the word a few times. "Those bastards," she cursed underneath her breath, starting to move forward. "What gives them the right to do as they please?" He grabbed for her arm before it crossed his mind that his height and weight didn't give him the advantage they should. She was no doubt aware of the same, so he willed her to take the touch as a reminder that running over to where Serebryakov was being helped along through the miniature no-man's-land or killing as many of "those bastards" as she could with her bare hands would help neither of them. After a few tense seconds where he gave serious contemplation to his precise level of willingness to return home with shattered ribs on account of a well-placed elbow, she stopped pulling away. He loosened his grasp, but his hand remained in place until Viktoriya was safely behind the Imperial line. It wasn't hard to keep pace with Tanya as she headed across the pavement, the hasty pace she set not enough to compensate for the short stride. "Serebryakov, what happened?" she asked, as soon as they made it to the other woman's side. Lehrgen's hand twitched out of a desire to slap his forehead. Tanya had no reputation for delicacy and yet managed to tunnel a hole under the low bar that had been set for her. Rarely was the Imperial Army accused of underplanning, so they'd made sure to have medical staff on hand to sort out who needed a ride directly to the hospital. Both nurses responsible for guiding Viktoriya onto a crude stretcher looked askance at Tanya for her interrogation. "Oh," was all Viktoriya said after a long pause, followed by another before she asked, "Lieutenant Colonel. That's you, isn't it?" "Of course it is," Tanya huffed. "Now, tell me what they-," Lehrgen reached up again and squeezed Tanya's arm pointedly. She turned to look at him, he shook his head, and something made it through that mind of hers too dense with knowledge to make room for mercy. She paused, drew a sharp breath, gave an "ah" as her eyes widened. Viktoriya took no notice of the interaction. "Oh, that's nice," she smiled, eyes drifting away again. When Tanya tried to follow her onto the train, Lehrgen tugged her back. "Medical personnel only in that car. They don't like us interfering," he explained, quickly, anticipating the angry barrage of questions he'll receive if he let her open her mouth. "You could tell them to let me on," she pointed out. "They'll take orders from you." "I could," he agreed, "but I wouldn't be in this job if I had a habit of abusing it. You'll get to talk to her. Just not now." "Of course," was all she said for a moment, while her hand went to cover her mouth and her head shook minutely back and forth. "I don't know why I asked. Rules are there to be followed." "I know why you asked. And you may have the rest of the week off once you hear she can have visitors." As they waited for the remainder of their men to return, he debated telling Tanya not to be worried that Viktoriya had required a few seconds to identify her. He'd seen the dark cloud pass through her gaze at the hesitation - concern for the woman's mental state, he assumed, unless she could possibly find a way to justify being angry at Viktoriya after what she'd been through. The too-smart eyes and unkempt platinum bangs were all that remained of the girl Tanya was three winters ago. She had gained enough height not to be remarkably short, had lost the shrill voice, several centimeters of hair, and if not all the baby fat on her face, enough to see cheekbones and jawline in place of androgynously round features. Eventually, he decided it was kinder to say nothing than to remind someone who wanted to skip over being a child that it was how someone important to her remembered her. Once it was over, Ernst joined them - he'd been sent off to take up position with a friend of his, useless as an adjutant unless his boss was feeling too lazy to refill his drink - Lehrgen gave a shrug to the other man's glance in Tanya's direction to indicate he wasn't sure how she was doing, and they boarded their plane back. They arrived with an hour to spare before the end of the day. If he thought Tanya would do anything other than stew alone in her apartment dreaming up new reasons the Empire's army needed a rematch with the Federation's, he'd send her home early. Her silence on the plane had been less contemplative than it had been completely withdrawn, knees drawn into her chest so that her feet rested on her seat. Ernst had tried - twice - to get her to talk about something light. Both conversations had been shut down with a startling efficiency. He passed by her office to say goodnight after he heard the grandfather clock at the end of the hall toll out six-thirty, off early so he had the permission to act surprised when an extra beer or two made tomorrow miserable. When he found Tanya, she was staring at the wall, lost in thought. For the first time, he'd caught his most reliable employee doing something other than enthusiastically attacking whichever tasks she'd been assigned. Maybe, it was the first time her life in the Army had been reduced to secondary importance. His plan had been to stop for a bite of food on the way home. It had occurred to him about an hour ago that he'd skipped lunch. It occurred to him now that she had too. He turned silently and left before she noticed he was there. A few minutes later he was back, two pretzels in hand, warm and soft and studded with salt, purchased from a cart down the street. "I think we both forgot lunch," he said, without preamble, walking into the room with her. She snapped back to the present and reflexively grabbed for one of her papers like she'd just put it down. "Sorry, I was just-," "It's fine," he said, putting her food down on her desk. She chewed at her pretzel listlessly, eyes concentrated on what was in front of her instead of engaging with him, offering him nothing besides a quiet word of thanks for the food. He inhaled slowly and gave a long-suffering sigh at his own incompetence in waiting so long to check on her. Had he come by earlier in the day, he could have called in one of the typists to cheer her up. He was not, by nature, a cheery person. Nor one who had an easy time finding the right words for someone who needed a shoulder to cry on. He glanced at the clock on her desk to watch the seconds tick by, waiting for her to finish eating. At the sound of her throat clearing, he cringed. His offer had been for silent companionship. Anyone helping her sort through unfamiliar emotions needed to come equipped with professional training he didn't have. "I'm alright," she said, as he took his eyes off the clock and shifted them to look at ones narrowed in mild annoyance at being pitied. "Today just made me think about my own...situation." Though it sounded selfish, thinking of oneself at a time like this, it was, in a very, very crude form, empathy. Imaging herself in the other woman's place was her first thread of emotional connection to another person's wellbeing. The Devil isn't the only thing that's real, he caught himself thinking, until he recalled the time he'd seen Viktoriya returning to her tent, drenched cap to boots in blood. To his concerned look she'd reported with pride that she'd severed someone's carotid artery with a shovel. None of the blood was hers. Partial beheadings with blunt objects were not the province of divine beings in any religion he wanted to believe in. The former first lieutenant was only human, albeit one with an unusually angelic demeanor. Lehrgen's mood now dissonantly celebratory, he stood up to get something to celebrate with. "I'll be back in a minute," he told Tanya, stepping out and towards his office again. He reached into a pocket for his keys and thumbed through until he found the right one, small, old, the gold plating flaking away, worn by who knew how many hands before his. Crouching down, he slid it into the lock on his bottom drawer. Inside was a bottle of the best vintage he didn't mind sharing, kept on hand for important visitors. He tucked it under his arm, drew two glasses from the shelf above, gave them a quick inspection to make sure there was no dust. Satisfied they were clean, he took the corkscrew and returned the other way down the hall. To Tanya, this wouldn't seem a celebration of herself, just a drink shared between friends the world over to mute painful memories. At seventeen, there was reason no longer to deny her the boon all soldiers deserved to enjoy. xXx It had been a long day. Tanya wasn't sure what her boss was up to, but she had a bad feeling he wasn't going to be making it any shorter. By nature, she'd never been talkative on the subject of her own self. Like anything else, at its core, opening up to someone was an exchange. In this case, risking reputation to gain an outlet. Ergo, not something she had an interest in taking to excess. Today had proven there was a first time for everything. A person could only go so long without failing to heed their own advice. Curiosity over why her boss kept information from her hadn't killed the cat, only ended a fifty-four year run of not asking unnecessary questions. Why would the General who handed off classified files to her like it was nothing withhold something as basic as the condition of their prisoners? Simple, if insulting. She'd been judged too weak to handle news that might upset her. Really, how low could his opinion of her get? At first, she'd been confused. She'd only been following suit with the rest of her row when she'd forced those tears out at the funeral for their men and their Empire as a whole. Lehrgen must have thought half the Army was unfit for duty after seeing all those men tear up once or twice. Briefly, she'd taken pity on a colleague after her own heart. Having personal standards over and above your employer's was a tough position to be in. That theory had gone out the window fast once Lehrgen brought up a salient observation - she was, indeed, a young woman. Working in HR, she'd heard a complaint or two about the same behavior being perceived differently based on something as superficial as appearance. Her standard response had been to politely explain there was nothing in the rulebook saying people couldn't have opinions you didn't like and then to shoo the offended party out of her office before they wasted any more time. She'd needed to push down the pangs of unfair, unfair, unfair. No matter what Being X said, she'd lived a morally unobjectionable life. Rejecting a suboptimal demand on her time hardly equated to treating anyone unfairly. That being said, she wouldn't complain if someone wanted to help her. Ugh. It was hard to shake the feeling she'd done immeasurable damage to her career. Instead of Degurechaff, reliable subordinate officer, she'd transformed into Tanya, a woman. Companies of this era weren't scoring any points for diverse boardrooms. Quite the opposite, in fact. If General von Lehrgen's future letter of recommendation for her amounted to something along the lines of She's very competent...for a girl, she really might need to cry over it. The trouble was, once you'd faked an emotional display for the sake of appearances, there was no backing down unless you wanted to be confused with someone lacking basic human decency. No one in their right mind would want to employ someone like that. She could kiss goodbye to her job - or any job for that matter - if she gave Lehrgen cause to distrust her well-intentioned nature. Just great, she told herself, when she saw him duck back through her door, noticing what he was carrying. Tanya should have welcomed the bottle of wine making a guest appearance in her office. Knowing what it meant - additional pity for her emotional state, and an expectation to confess her deep, abiding, nonexistent sadness - she was dubious she could give the probably decent red the appreciation it deserved. Fine wine had for years been one of the few indulgences she'd allowed herself to waste money on. A five thousand yen bottle for each raise, ten thousand for a promotion. Special occasions were the only time she let herself have more than a glass or two at a time. Regularly drinking more would have been a quick way to make sure there were no more special occasions to celebrate. Her biggest complaint about Japanese work culture had been that it left her no polite way to decline every single invitation to nights of excessive drinking. She hated to admit it, but she had some experience managing her image while under the influence. Unlike certain coworkers she could name, she never had to try to excuse her unprofessional behavior the next morning. College, on the other hand, did leave her with - or without, as it were - one or two of those memories. Experiences like that she was only too happy to leave in the past. Luckily, a single bottle split in two limited her potential intake to a reasonable quantity. She wasn't going to be building any fancy spells tonight, but she would make it home without an embarrassing gaffe. While Lehrgen did the work of opening the bottle, Tanya searched the label. She wasn't arrogant enough to call herself a connoisseur, so it came as no surprise she didn't recognize the name of some grand old estate or other. Burgundia and Premier Cru told her all she really needed to know. She couldn't say what a 1915 vintage meant, except that she trusted her boss to be intelligent enough not to have aged incredibly mediocre wine for fifteen years. Shortly after hearing the pop of a successful uncorking, the rich, acidic - not acrid - smell drifted her way. She put on a show of false patience while she watched tawny red trickle into a glass. She was offered a taste before her full serving was poured as a pointlessly polite gesture. If she was going to do it, she was going to do it right. She swirled the glass a few times and then tipped it forward to take in the scent. "Usually I let it breathe for fifteen minutes," Lehrgen interrupted. "I think it's mature enough not to make much difference." He gave a shrug, apparently to apologize for serving something slightly less than perfect. Lehrgen had never mentioned he routinely offered friends well-aged wine. A level of familiarity beyond "Degurechaff, stellar employee" was looking like it wasn't altogether a bad thing. Thankfully, a wine of this quality required next to no palate to enjoy. Her as-of-yet unrefined taste buds didn't recoil at her first sip, so she continued to be a good sport and gave it a swish before she finished the experience. Judgment panel of one appeased, Tanya nodded her approval to receiving a continued performance. Not wanting to be rude, she tossed a compliment out as well. "You have good taste," she remarked, waiting for Lehrgen to finish pouring his own glass before she took hers back. "As do you, apparently." He retook his seat. "I didn't realize they'd added a class on wine-tasting to the War College curriculum. Shame it was after my time." "Ugar wanted to make sure I was fit for society," she replied, which technically wasn't a lie. "Funny," Lehrgen said, pausing to take a long sip of his drink so that she had time to wonder about what was so funny. "He mentioned to me once that he didn't drink." Tanya took another swallow of wine to give herself time to come up with a response. What an inconvenient way of finding out those two knew each other. "It's no surprise he made an exception for you, really," Lehrgen continued, solving her quandary for her but not looking happy about it. "People always do." "Well, he always helped me where he could," Tanya agreed, suddenly conscious she'd never done much to acknowledge that Lehrgen had done the same. "Thanks for that, by the way." Over the years, she'd seen a number of reactions out of normally stoic adult men that they wouldn't want her remembering. Demure was a new one. Lehrgen's head turned away like a shy girl getting a compliment. Maybe in his next life. "I just wanted to do the right thing," he mumbled out. "And I - I never did ask, I should have, but why did you enlist so early?" "Conscripts don't exactly get their pick of the lot when it comes to assignments," she said carefully, toeing the line between admitting to a complete aversion to all forms of violence and giving the impression that she'd wanted to be tasked with the Empire's most dangerous missions. Lehrgen had made a career out of being in the Army. Telling him she'd like nothing more than to put him out of a job would only make him question why he was employing her in the first place. "I thought if I was an officer I'd have a better chance to put myself in an advantageous position. And, well, we both know how that turned out," she said, giving a self-deprecating sniff of laughter over how badly that plan had failed. Lehrgen sighed, taking his glasses off for a moment to rub a hand over his face. Tanya had no trouble understanding the display of frustration. For all the work both of them had put into getting her reassigned to a rear posting, neither had anything to show for it. "That's what I thought," he said with a grimace. "Just figured it was worth asking to make sure." How thorough, Tanya thought, smiling again as she took another sip. It's no wonder he did so well in Personnel. She knew from experience that there was nothing more important than having an understanding of what motivated each employee. When it came down to it, most people weren't asking what they could do for their company, but what their company could do for them. The beauty of the free market was in its ability to turn selfish impulses into a productive economy, improving everyone's quality of life for no reason other than that it was financially prudent to do so. "About Ms. Serebryakov…" Lehrgen ventured after a moment. "I'm fine," Tanya said quickly. "Really," she stressed, after he raised his eyebrows. "I'll be okay." With that cleared up, she went back to what she really wanted to be doing - concentrating on her wine. If memory served, she'd never had an Old World red aged to such perfection. Malbec had been her go-to option. She may not have been a viticultural historian, but she knew enough to be sure that in this day and age Europa would be drinking a French variety instead of Argentine, which would make for an interesting comparison. She should stop in at a wine importer next time she was out. It was a shame she wouldn't be able to linger over her glass. The longer they sat there, the more reason she gave Lehrgen to think she was going to "open up" or whatever it was he'd expected her to do after breaking out the wine. On some level, he must have remained unconvinced of her ability to handle ugly truths, going so far as to keep a steadying hand on her arm the whole time they'd watched Visha. You'd think he'd realize that if she were prone to fainting, she'd have done it already. And what had he been trying to prove with that iron grip? An annoying "feature" of being short was that tall people didn't realize you needed to move a few steps for a better view. Ironically, she'd turned out to be the unrecognizable one today, not Visha. That had been the only bit of humor for the day. That loopy face on someone who should be feeling anything else - relief, rage, revenge - gave her the creepy feeling Being X and his cronies were involved. After giving up on her, Tanya couldn't rule out he'd go messing with someone else's head and send her back a Visha who would talk about nothing except the glory of God on the off chance a friend would be more persuasive than a non-corporeal entity. Being honest with herself, it was partially paranoia. That devil and his minions had been taking it easily recently. For the first time in either life, Tanya understood the feeling of a parent whose toddler had been quiet for too long and feared they'd come across a magnum opus drawn on the wall in permanent marker. After her inexcusable slip-up, asking Lehrgen to make an exception for her based on an emotional appeal, she had to wonder if she was still suffering from the after-effects of the Type 95. As her day had consisted of one mistake after another, a half-hour ago her boss had caught her in the middle of combing through her memories for additional instances of subtle mental interference. It might have been after-hours, but it was never a good look when you were found daydreaming on the job. Especially after today's successive failures to rid Lehrgen of any doubt over her dependability. That was the very reason she'd be letting him pour her third glass of wine shortly. She was not, under any circumstances, going to leave him with the impression she required hours of wallowing in grief every time something went wrong. She could handle bad news like Lehrgen probably did - downing a few drinks in silence then calling it a night. That wasn't to say she was unaffected by seeing what Visha had been reduced to. It had taken her an atypically long time to pull herself out of the unhelpfully despairing thoughts, given that nothing had happened to her personally. Then again, this was the first time she'd had a project she'd been working on for several years unceremoniously scrapped while she was out on vacation. A salaryman's worst nightmare. Ultimately, the responsibility fell on Tanya to help get Visha back on her feet, figuratively and literally. She couldn't stand people who made others clean up their fallout, and she had been the one that begged Lehrgen to go into that fateful battle. Weirdly, she was feeling more enthusiastic than expected about giving a helping hand to her old lieutenant, which promised to be a chore and then some. All she could chalk it up to was excitement over getting another chance to develop the potential of a promising candidate. In this instance, she'd concede she'd at long last found something positive to say about being turned into a woman - Visha was going to have an easier time talking to her. That aside, Tanya probably wasn't the best person for the job. Mouthing meaningless platitudes on repeat wasn't something she had the slightest interest in doing. But, she was perfectly capable of listening without interrupting, and if she absolutely had to, she could pat someone's back while they cried. Tanya caught herself just before she let a sigh escape. That was exactly what she'd sworn she wouldn't do until her reputation was out of harm's way. xXx Lehrgen watched - first in amusement, then in pity, by the end in consternation - as Tanya drained her second serving of wine as swiftly as her first. Wondering what other monster he'd unleashed in her, he caught up, then lifted the bottle to pour each of them a final glass. "I take it you like the wine," he volunteered, wishing he'd had something cheaper on hand for as criminally fast as it was disappearing. "You have a favorite kind?" "Malbec," she nodded decisively. "Though this is very good." Malbec? he thought. Malbec? It was the house wine served at local inns dotting the Garonne River. The wine cheap Republican grandfathers might drink. The leftover grapes that didn't make it into the finer blends for export. He hadn't expected he was serving Tanya her first taste of alcohol. A preference he would understand - for something accessible to the wallet and palate of a seventeen-year-old, like Reisling, for something special Ugar might have let her taste, like a good Bordèu. And of all the answers she could have given, she gave Malbec. Too many questions flooded his mind. Where had she acquired the taste? During her time in the Republic, it had to be. He couldn't remember the last time he'd seen it on a shelf in Berun, if ever. Who had given her enough to acquire a taste? No one, maybe. Her rank. He didn't ask. He didn't want to know. With her, only complex questions came with simple answers, like laughing in his face about how successful she'd been in navigating the Army's hierarchy at age ten to get her to where she wanted. Simple questions, on the other hand, never come with simple answers. For the same reason, he was silent on the topic of why she refused to admit she needed to talk when the speed at which she was drinking his wine said she desperately did. She refused the arm he held out, too, when she stood and he saw her use the chair to find her balance. She took a deep breath, fixed her gaze to the end of the hall, and marched onward in deliberately even steps. To his relief, she did not refuse when he hailed her a cab. "If you need the day off tomorrow…" he offered. She seated herself before she replied. "General," she said, word enunciated with a crispness that reassured him he could send her home without accompaniment, "I hope I haven't done anything to make you think I'm not capable of doing my work properly." "Quite the opposite. Just trying to…" He drifted off, trying to be nice sounding both too childishly defensive and too much like another lie of omission he'd have to add to his tally. Mostly, he was acting out of compassion for his other employees, with a little reserved for himself. He'd like hasn't made anyone cry to stay on Tanya's list of accomplishments for the year, which meant no hungover surliness. "...anyway, good night," he finished, closing the door with a solid thunk. 




 

 Don't say I didn't, say I didn't warn ya






 
 "She is a monster, without being a myth, which is rather unfair."
 
 November 22, 1930Berun-Charité Hospital
 “...and really, you know, the police had it all backwards, they didn’t find the big crime they expected, just a few things here and there, but they carted poor little Johann off to the precinct anyway, because…” Ah. Where were they again? Tanya gave a stretch and an audible yawn from her chair in the corner - which went unnoticed - to shake herself out of her daze, then glanced around the room. Nothing had changed. Still in a spare, small, starkly white room. Visha still propped up in her bed smiling softly as though she was enjoying the story she was being told, in spite of her eyes and the way she was playing with her now-long hair saying she wasn’t paying it much attention. A brunette who lacked an indoor voice and was cursed to die if she went more than ninety seconds without saying something still occupying the doctor’s stool next to the patient. The same as it had been five minutes ago when she’d drifted off. Or fifty. It was hard to tell, and she had a bad feeling if she glanced at the clock the answer would be the former, which meant that it only felt like an hour had passed. Typically, Tanya wasn’t one for giving into distraction. Over the past week she’d come to realize the credit for that didn’t go to her. Her previous successes had less to do with not being a distractible person than the fact that as a general rule, she had better ways to spend her time than on being distracted. As she would concede that her interest in Elya’s latest blouse wasn’t likely due to a latent interest in fashion trends borne out of her seventeen years spent as a woman, it was time to refocus. There had to be a better direction Tanya could take the conversation than an in-depth analysis of the life of some schoolmate or other of Elya’s from childhood. Honestly, who cared? The girl herself sounded like a bore, albeit one that had manifested the ability to attract chaos with the same power a bland harem anime protagonist attracted women who had no reason to be interested in him. In any case, the petty-crime legal travails of a brother of a friend of a friend were hardly the type of mental stimulation Visha needed. Elya was singlehandedly tanking the value of Tanya’s investment in the other woman’s future. Her upfront costs had increased drastically, and who knew what all this exposure to mental mush was doing to the payback period. If she was ever going to have a coherent conversation with Visha again, they needed to stimulate her mind with subject matter that was conversation-worthy. Which, to be clear, were not stories that belonged eighty years in the future on some low-brow American channel. Redirecting the topic of discussion without sounding like she was interrupting was a skill she hadn’t perfected until the end of her first life. For anyone observing her in this one, she’d appear to be nothing less than a natural. “Do you work much with the police?” Tanya asked, branching off from a recent comment, the way she’d done multiple times every day for the past week. The silence that greeted her question was in one way a welcome reprieve. On the other hand, the confused stare only served to deepen her concern about the intellectual acumen of the woman professing to be Visha’s best friend. It was no wonder their injured compatriot had a habit of retreating into her head. It was the sole place she could escape the subtle torture of being subjected to an endless stream of someone else’s consciousness. At one point - before Tanya had gotten her hands on Visha’s education - it was clear why Visha would have been impressed by Elya. Tanya had the benefit of two lives, which meant she’d been on one planet or another long enough to know that talking at length didn’t equate to having anything important to say. “The local police departments,” she repeated slowly, given Elya’s demonstrated difficulty switching gears. “I’m curious if you help them coordinate, since I imagine there are high-level threats you all need to be involved in managing.” Gaining a personal in with the intelligence community would keep her up-to-date on extremist political trends. A cursory glance at history told her she couldn’t blindly trust her chain of command to do an accurate threat assessment. Adding to the difficulty of establishing her own barometer, most newspapers tended towards an outright bias their modern counterparts publicly denied. And a commitment to fact-checking was never going to prevent companies with a profit target to meet from capitalizing off of exalting any tidbit as sensational. Elya was not shaping up to be as useful in this regard as Tanya had been led to believe. Even so, she was better than nothing. Probably. “Yes - ahh - yes,” Elya said, after blinking a few times and clearing her throat. “Though coordinate is a bit of a strong word for it.” “That sounds inefficient.” “It has to be,” Elya shrugged. “We can’t have the Army directing the police around like they’re part of it.” “Maybe not,” Tanya mused, tapping her chin while she gathered her thoughts. Jurisdictional lines were no excuse for letting dangerous, nationally-coordinated movements take off. “But so long as the primary objective was domestic targets, an officially-unaffiliated, central body would eliminate what I’m sure is plenty of redundancy. Make sure nothing slips through the cracks. It should pass muster.” Elya twirled a piece of hair. “I’m not sure I know enough about it to say.” “We’d have to be careful if we traced back an issue to something outside our borders,” Tanya reminded her. It was something a more experienced professional would have known without being told. She didn’t need a hyperenergetic airhead running them headlong into an international snafu. “As long as we do that, it should be alright.” “Well…” Elya hesitated. “It wouldn’t hurt to run it up the flagpole,” Tanya said. “If things go right, you wouldn’t need to work for the Army anymore.” Judging by the sniff of disdain to her helpful suggestion, she’d misjudged the attachment a former conscript felt towards the institution that had taken her freedom away. Logic was not on a winning streak that day. “A central bureau’s in a better position to compile data,” she continued hastily, seeing that Visha was about to receive the full force of Elya’s impressive lung power again. Making someone who didn’t want to talk the center of attention was uncomfortable for everyone involved. What was more important was that they were there, so when Visha wanted to talk, she could. “Knowing what the trends for different crimes are could put you a step ahead.” “So, what, you arrest people who seem like the type that would commit a crime?” Elya asked, with a tinkle of laughter. “Well, not exactly,” Tanya explained, since she was unable to make a call on whether the statement was a joke or an indication of nuances flying over Elya’s head. “More a method of increasing the effectiveness of the police department’s resource allocation. Reliable metrics can make a surprising amount of difference.” “I guess you might be right about that,” Elya said with disinterest. Tanya tried not to sigh. She was determined to live long enough to reach the time when at least half the population accepted that data was smarter than they were. As Elya’s career aspirations lay outside the realm of personal crime, Tanya would have to pique her interest via another subject. “Think of it this way,” she offered. “Plenty of people commit minor infractions under the assumption they’ll get away with it because the police have better things to do. But in the case of, say, a political group that was destabilizing the national order, the subtler method would be to bring everyone in on unrelated yet legitimate charges. This gives you a way to know when and where to put the manpower, fairly compare how successful different approaches have been, instead of waiting until the communists go marching on May Day, shooting at them, and making them the victims. Or whatever our current strategy is.” Finally, she earned a smile, tight-lipped though it was. Upon reflection, that last remark may have been ill-advised on the grounds of being overly critical of the work their intelligence experts, Elya included, were doing. “You really are too smart for your own good, you know,” Elya replied, with a small shake of her head. In spite of her difficulty in feeling flattered by the opinion of someone who had yet to come out with any valuable observations, Tanya forced a smile at the compliment a second before Elya swiveled to face the other direction. “I had another question.” Elya’s head jerked back around. “Did you?” “I see my share of classified material, but I don’t get much in the way of first-hand briefings,” Tanya said. “I’ve been wondering what your department is most worried about at the present.” To her surprise, Elya could give a cogent response to an intellectual inquiry when forced to do so. Other than that, not much in the way of pleasant information came out of her answer. Of course, Tanya wasn’t unaware that the Ostrian election coming up in the spring was largely a referendum on the issue of pursuing the cause of Imperial reunification. The newspapers she kept up with had extensively analyzed the possible outcomes and what they meant for the long-term trajectory of international politics. So far, they’d been curiously silent on the subject of what the outcomes might indicate in the immediate for her country’s domestic politics. And as far as Elya was concerned, there were no good outcomes. A strong showing for one side, a strong showing for the other, continued ambivalence, any way the chips fell, they were, in a word, screwed. In each case, enough of the electorate would find a sudden motivation to get out of their chairs that it could disturb her country’s very imperfect yet perfectly reasonable center-left coalition. Ah, the joys of interwar Europe. She could hardly wait to see how fun a potential Great Depression could be. Really, she’d so often complained to friends and family in her past life that it was a shame she’d only been alive for the Great Recession. She’d have to thank Being X for the opportunity the next time he dropped by. Elya was clearly a woman used to getting the last word in the most literal way possible. By the time Tanya had found another topic Visha might find thought-provoking, they were back at it, deep into the personal history of someone they’d never meet. Oh well. This way, she’d be prepared for tomorrow. For now, she’d try to tune it out and get working on the promised regular update to Weiss. 
 November 28, 1930General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 It doesn’t count if no one saw, Erich von Lehrgen consoled himself, the drowsy quiet of a Saturday evening in the office swiftly and forcefully ending with his door being kicked in. The last noise he’d heard was another overworked soul leaving when the last light of the day had faded, nearly an hour ago. “Aghh,” Elya shouted, as soon as she’d slammed the door shut equally as loudly. “I’ve been trying to talk to you all week.” “It’s been busy,” he excused himself. “All I had was an hour yesterday afternoon and you-,” “I know, I know,” she interrupted. “I tried to make it. It was my last day at work before I go home and every single person in the unit wanted a half-hour goodbye. I got trapped.” He couldn’t stop the grin he made behind folded hands. Too talkative, too unfocused, too familiar, he’d spent long enough reading personnel files to see the criticisms that ran through the minds of her reviewers as easily as he did the reasons they hesitated to put them to paper. They were what made her one of the best at what she did. There was an irrepressible magnetism to someone that expected you to be nobody aside from yourself. “I’m glad no one likes me that much,” he laughed, with some truth behind the words. “I can usually sneak off without saying anything.” “And happy birthday, by the way,” she rushed on, hopping over to a different subject, so rushed she’d declined to sit when he’d pointed at a chair. “Sorry it’s almost a week late.” “I would have invited you out for drinks,” he told her, shaking his head at her apology, “but I wasn’t sure how Walther would feel about that.” Her arms went from waving wildly to crossed over her chest, her face from breezy laughter to a pout - and not one of her cutesy ones - usual tumultuous energy transmuted to tense hostility in the space of a second. “I see,” she said, the words snipped out with all the deliberate care and coldness of a surgeon. “Thanks for reminding me what some other man might want is more important than asking what I want.” Lehrgen blinked rapidly a few times. Adjusted his glasses. Managed no verbal response beyond a stunned utterance of “ahhh?” “God - umm - I’m sorry Erich. General. I shouldn’t’ve - especially not in the office,” Elya spilled out in a single whooshing breath. He cleared his throat and cocked his head to the side in acknowledgement that she was correct on the count of her breach of protocol. “All I meant by it was that I didn’t want it to be my fault if something happened that soured a relationship I think is important to you,” he explained patiently. “I didn’t want you to feel obligated to come out because I’d done you the favor of getting you to Berun, and I wish I could say none of my friends make regrettable decisions after too much beer, but…” “Who wants friends that don’t make regrettable decisions after too much beer? she said, with a subdued laugh. “And I know you didn’t mean it that way. I am sorry. Life’s just been - yeah.” “Because of Walther?” he asked, wondering what her heretofore perfect boyfriend had done to ruin things so thoroughly so quickly. “Because of everything.” The uneven warble of her voice gave him the idea she was perilously near to throwing decorum out the window and careening into him for a good cry. On some nights, when insomnia kept him awake long enough for his thoughts to amble peripatetically among all questions he had for himself, past, present, and future, he pondered whether the demands and hours of his job provided too convenient an excuse. They shielded him from entanglements where he would become the shoulder of first resort, so to speak. The youthful romance he’d once seen in the gesture had long since given way to practical concerns. He would be bad at it. Slowly and surely, every day and every difficult decision sapped away at his capacity for it. It would be the ruin of things. Maybe he should get a dog. “You know what?” he said, glancing down at his watch running seven minutes past the hour. There was one form of sympathy he was perfectly adequate at providing. “It’s almost five. It’s Saturday. I don’t know what I’m still doing here, I definitely don’t know what you’re still doing here, and I think you could use a drink. I haven’t replaced the wine I usually keep here, so beer okay?” “I am a proper Imperial working-class girl. It is beer or nothing,” Elya said, emphasizing each word with mock insult. He led them in comfortable silence towards the opposite of his usual preference for unpopular, quarter-full beer halls, positive the one that ranked as Ernst’s favorite would be loud enough to drown any further outbursts from Elya in a sea of noise. “So,” he said, after they’d gotten food and drink and seats. “Where do you want to start?” The back and forth tilt of her head as she considered her answer made him reach first for a deep quaff of beer and next for the carton in his pocket. He never expected a short conversation with Elya, and this would be a longer commitment if she needed time to gather her thoughts before launching them into the open. “I won’t bore you with the Walther drama,” she decided. “That’s probably better off said to my girlfriends.” “Ahh,” he acknowledged, turning sideways on his bench momentarily to give him room to strike a match. “Yes. You can spare me certain kinds of details.” “Not like that,” she rolled her eyes, then grabbed for the cigarette he extended across the table to her before he could take it back in petty vengeance. He’d been so close to escaping. “We talk sometimes. About the future. And I don’t know how it took me so long to realize, but in none of those futures do I ever have a job.” “And you want to work?” “Don’t you?” “It’s different.” “It is not. Or it shouldn’t be.” “Maybe it shouldn’t be,” he conceded, spreading his hands to the sides in exasperation. “But the fact of the matter is that it is. You know that. Don’t take it so hard just because he assumed you wouldn’t. I mean, I would assume my wife wouldn’t work.” “And if she wanted to?” He leaned his head back and blew a pillar of smoke towards the ceiling above him. “Right now you’re very much reminding me of a dear friend who’d be appalled I didn’t answer that immediately,” he chuckled, giving his head a shake and taking another draw. “I suppose I’d go along with it. If it came down to that. The only woman I ever seriously considered marrying worked last I checked. I don’t think I could’ve begrudged her that.” “Edith?” Elya asked, raising an eyebrow. “That’s the one.” “Maybe if I wanted to write for a women’s magazine I’d be alright,” Elya scoffed. “You do know that it’s weird you know all this, right?” he asked, to bring her back out of the funk she was determined to be in. “We were at war with the Commonwealth,” she replied, waving it off. “You could have been compromised.” “It was more than ten years ago,” he protested. “More importantly, who did you not-seriously consider marrying?” she questioned, leaning her elbows in. Usually, her unabashed interest in everyone’s personal business was not a quality he found overly endearing, useful as it might be. But this story he so often couldn’t tell to people he needed to think of him exclusively in a certain, serious light. The brief reprieves, prisms into the lives others had, the lives he could have had, were why he told himself he put up with Elya’s quirks he should officially disapprove of. “Franziska Nowak,” he stated, pleased to know something about himself she didn’t. “Franziska Hornig now.” “You see her anymore?” “I do. Not often, but I do.” “And how do you think her husband feels about that?” she asked, a triumphant smirk on her face. “Well, I don’t care, because I’ve convinced myself I hate him because he’s abhorrent, you see,” he said. His explanation of sound logic in coming to that conclusion was lost when another patron of the beer hall bumped into him, sloshed a minor amount of drink, and spent a small eternity apologizing profusely after seeing his uniform. “Anyway, his opinion doesn’t matter.” “I could look into him,” Elya offered. “I’m sure most men do a thing or two their wives wouldn’t approve of.” “Please don’t,” Erich said, waving his hands rapidly in front of him. “They have about six children last I counted, and then I’d feel responsible for all of them, and that would be a whole other mess.” For emphasis that this vendetta was to remain his own, he thunked down the beer he’d just finished. “Now, please understand, this thing with her seemed very serious at the time. But I was fifteen. So make of that what you will,” he told her, with a laugh that bubbled up from his stomach. “I’m getting another drink first. You?” She nodded, and he returned minutes later to her in the same position, ready to listen with rapt attention. He took a healthy sip, and then lost himself momentarily to the past. Their household cook, and her daughter. Going away to cadet school and coming back one break to realize she’d grown up. Or maybe he had. Then, two years later, when he was old enough to know there was more to it than smiling shyly and old enough too to know he had no chance of convincing anyone who mattered to accept her as one of them. He’d felt, for the first time in his life, trapped. After cadet school would come service, and then school again, and then back to service, and when his rank and salary were right he’d be introduced to someone who could pronounce mille-feuille and play Chopin and make their guests laugh over dinners prepared by a girl he’d recommend to another household after his son looked at her too long. It was a life he enjoyed, when the stresses were manageable, though his version of it had gone a bit sideways as of June the 30th, 1923. That hadn’t made it any less overwhelming when it had all snapped into too harsh a focus one summer evening. He’d gone to sleep convinced he would give his father a piece of his mind the next day and if, or more likely when, that wasn’t met with agreement, he’d run off, elope, change his own last name to hers and start a new life as someone else. In the morning, after dreaming all night about what it would be like to camp in the woods for the rest of eternity, the sum total of his skills applicable to life without his usual privileges, he’d thought better of it. Hanging around the kitchen anytime he had an excuse to would suffice. “So not a total loss,” he laughed, wrapping the story up. “It’s how I learned how to cook.” “Not at all,” Elya agreed, giving a warm smile across the table. She got out a cigarette of her own, and motioned for his so she could light it. “You know, the first boy I ever kissed lives in Berun,” she continued. “In the past three months, he’s gone to the hospital seven times. For nightclub-related...incidents.” “That defies the imagination,” Erich wheezed, after he inhaled some beer into his lungs. “You don’t know him. At least you got your little love story. I went for someone whose brain cells all got taken away to make a nice-looking face.” “Anyway, this conversation was supposed to be about your romantic dramas, not mine,” he reminded her, before any more embarrassing stories wormed their way out. “Did you tell Walther you want to keep your job?” “I did,” she nodded, looking down at her glass. “And he wasn’t mean about it or anything, but it’s like he’s insulted I’m so stuck on it.” “I’ll be the Devil’s advocate, so think about it from his perspective,” Erich explained. “His whole life he’s been told it’s his responsibility to provide for his family. You working makes it out to be that he can’t.” Luckily, Elya took the time between shooting up from her seat and stomping off to throw her cigarette on the ground and stamp it out. It gave him a chance to grab for her wrist and convince her to turn back around. “All I wanted was one person, one,” she shouted, still standing, fist waving in the air perilously near his face, while he wondered if it wouldn’t have been better to let her go. “One person who tries to see it from my perspective. My own mother doesn’t want to listen. All my friends went from patting me on the back for having a real job to calling me crazy for not wanting to give it up so I could marry someone with more money than girls like us ever get to see.” She paused to take a breath, plopped down into her seat, and swiped a thumb under each eye. “God this is embarrassing.” “I’m sorry,” he told her, honestly. “Over the years I’ve gotten too used to problems requiring my advice, not my sympathy.” “No, I’m sorry. Again,” Elya huffed, collapsing down onto the table. “I’m just running out of people to talk to. I know Visha would’ve had the opinion that she’s my friend so she’s on my side unless I ask her to have her own opinion. But how can I talk to her like I’m the one that has problems?” His eyes fell to the wood of the table. It was a subject he’d avoided, and not exclusively with Elya. Curious and concerned though he might be, his reticence was in part because it would only bring up the once inflammatory debate on opening the mage conscription pool to all eligible women, a dispute neither Elya nor Tanya would be keen on acknowledging previously existed. Still existed, depending on who was asked. The greater part of him kept silent so that ignorance might for once be bliss. He was free to imagine a normal friendship budding and blossoming between two young women without facing the reality that it wasn’t. That it might be impossible. “I do want to ask about her,” he confessed, giving a few heartfelt nods. “Before that, and I never thought I’d say this, ever - but if you’re looking for someone who’ll tell you very convincingly, with no hesitation, that you’re right and Walther’s wrong, I think I know the person.” “That friend you mentioned?” “Her too. Maybe,” Erich smiled. Marian was not quite the champion Elya imagined of anyone aside from herself. She had little patience for women she felt hurt her own cause. “Except she’s not in the country at the moment. I assume with going to visit Ms. Serebryakov that you’ve run into Tanya Degurechaff once or twice?” “Oh,” Elya said, conveying layers of judgment with her tone in a way he was convinced only women who’d been popular in their adolescent years could. “Her. That’s actually why I wanted to talk to you. We’ll get to her. I promise.” “Oh no,” slipped out of his mouth shortly before consuming the remainder of his beer silenced further conversation for half a minute. “I was an idiot for thinking it might be otherwise,” he sighed. “So before I go get two more drinks and we start that conversation, is there anything else with Walther?” “I do want your advice,” Elya said, uncharacteristically toned down. “From the perspective of advising me how to change his mind, not mine.” “Well, I’m no expert,” he qualified. “So I’ll give you the best piece of advice my brother ever gave me. You don’t know Otto, but if you did you would not at all be shocked to know this is possibly the lone piece of good advice he’s ever given me.” Elya gave a quiet laugh, a touch of humor returning to her face. “He told me that the best thing he’d done for himself was to stop constantly comparing the reality of what he’d done with his life to his expectations of what he would do and accept that in many cases, he was happier being where he was than where he thought he should be. You’re young. The world is moving in your direction, however slowly it feels to you. Maybe all Walther needs is time to realize nothing’s wrong with choosing what he wants over what he wants to want.” “Two drinks in and everyone’s a philosopher,” Elya joked kindly. “Thanks. I needed to hear there’s a chance he’ll come around.” “If I recall, Otto was closer to six drinks in, and that’s the way he pours them,” Erich frowned, closing an eye as he tried to recall that night. “I’m glad it did someone some good. Overthinking things is one of my specialties, and he’s my sibling, so needless to say, I had to ignore it.” While Elya laughed and wiped her eyes a final time, he retrieved a double serving of alcohol for the both of them, and for good measure another bite of food. “So then, how is Ms. Serebryakov?” he asked, upon retaking his seat. “Hard to say,” Elya grimaced. “She acts basically content most of the time, smiles a bit, laughs a bit, talks a bit. She doesn’t engage unless you make her, spends a lot of time off in her head. Which I figure is about the worst place it could be so I try to keep her focused on me. Pray that with enough time she’ll sort of break out of it. Permanently.” “But you have a train back to Leibzich tomorrow,” he stated, with an understanding nod. “Right. So the reason I needed to talk to you-,” “Elya, I’m sorry,” he preempted. “I can’t invent reasons to keep you here. I wish I could.” “No - umm - I know. What I’m hoping you can do is talk to Tanya.” He was not in the habit of lighting one cigarette from the dying embers of another. For tonight, he made an exception. “You couldn’t talk to her yourself?” “I could, just - well, I don’t think she likes me. It’s rather obvious she likes you. Though whether that’s actually friendship or not might be up for debate.” He rolled his eyes and gave a pained grunt of acknowledgment. That he had no desire for Tanya’s friendship was besides the point. The point was that he didn’t enjoy hearing a person as intuitive as Elya suspect that what Tanya defined as a friend might simply be a person exceeding a certain level of utility, after he’d so recently begun to hope that might not be the whole truth of it. “Anyhow, she might listen to you,” Elya finished. “What makes you think she doesn’t like you?” he asked. On a girl Tanya’s age, the stern demeanor she was given to could easily read as an active expression of hatred. While he remained open to the possibility that her default state was one of deep and directionless belligerence, it was more comforting to believe that aside from the glimpses of childish expressions, like puffed cheeks, or Tanya-ish expressions, like maniacal glee, her standard repertoire of faces were mirrored from the people she spent most of her time with. “I don’t know, she stares at me very...intensely...sometimes,” Elya explained. “Inspecting me or something. She always seems super annoyed I’m there. It’s - if you were there, you’d agree.” “She’s an intense person,” he agreed. “Piece of advice, ask yourself if you’d feel the same if it was a lieutenant general you were dealing with.” Elya narrowed her eyes in disagreement. “When men in their fifties stare at me that much, there’s really only one reason.” It wouldn’t be the strangest thing about her, Erich thought, an eyebrow quirking up. He would be glad of one oddity that was benign in nature. Elya gave a sniff when she caught his expression. “Just because you’d rather believe it doesn’t make it true.” “Don’t tell me you aren’t cosmopolitan enough to consider the possibility,” he snapped back, after a polite cough and a glance in her direction that was meant to convey she’d gone from tiptoeing the lines to crossing them with all the impunity of the Legadonian Army. “I know perfectly well how a woman’s interest looks, Mr. von Lehrgen,” she declared, crossing her arms and sticking her chin in the air. “Maybe better than you.” He mimed like he was being stabbed while she tried to keep a straight face. “Low blow,” he pretended to gasp out. “I’m joking, I’m joking,” came the peals of laughter. “Anyway, I know the difference between staring and glaring. She hates me, I swear. Maybe because I’m not as serious as her and she thinks I don’t belong in the Army. She told me that, you know. But probably because she’s got the notion she’s closest with Visha when we both know I am.” God help me, he groaned, rubbing at his forehead. War he could deal with. Standing in the middle of a teenage-girl drama where one participant knew every secret he never wanted told and the other came as close as it got to a human weapon was a far deeper layer of hell. “Let her win, please,” he muttered out, pinching the bridge of his nose. “Why?” “Because first off, I’d like to believe she’s capable of having a best friend, and secondly, if it isn’t Ms. Serebryakov, I think that makes it me. You’ve already dealt me enough damage for one night.” “Well what kind of best friend sits in a hospital room philosophizing about political quagmires?” Elya said, loud enough it would have been a shout were they in a quieter setting. “I mean, when you’ve had a rough day, do you go home and flip through the funny pages, or decide you're in the mood to break out the Wittgenstein? Can’t she talk about nothing? Does she ever turn off?” “Elya,” he sighed, covering both her hands where they rested on the table with his. “That is off.” “You can’t be serious.” “Dead.” “God, how do you deal with that every day?” He made sure to catch her eye, raised his glass, and jiggled his wrist to slosh the dregs of his beer, then tossed it back. “Please tell me that’s not true.” “No,” he relented. “Or at least only a little.” When it came to not speaking unless he had something to say, the real truth of it was that he trended closer to Tanya’s extreme than Elya’s. He enjoyed the bursts of levity Elya brought to his life for their infrequency. They were as delightful as they were draining. Recognizing that Tanya could benefit from loosening up once in a while wasn’t quite the same as disliking that she didn’t. “Who even knows if Visha wanted to see her again,” Elya questioned. He did his best to conceal the wince. The reunion was in no small way his doing. In his haste to capitalize on what he’d seen as an uncommonly genial attitude of Tanya’s, he’d entirely passed over the question of which woman deserved his help more. “What I can’t figure is why someone so lovely would want to spend a second more of her time with someone who refuses to ever be lovely,” Elya went on, shaking her hands next to her head. “War does funny things to people,” he shrugged, more interested in what Elya’s sudden burst of knowledge about Tanya implied than rehashing the ways they’d all been shaped by the last decade. “Degurechaff’s at the hospital when she can be?” “Whenever I am,” Elya muttered darkly into her drink. “What’s she talk about?” “Mostly things in the news. Although the other week she got going on how we could legally resurrect the Intelligence service back to its old size and start jailing political dissidents en masse without actually jailing them for dissidence.” “That’s basically normal,” he reassured. “You going to do anything with it?” “Uhh, might I remind you, my rank doesn’t let me decide I’d like to do something and then make it happen,” Elya said, leaning back and then catching herself when she almost fell. “And I don’t know if I’ve ever heard such a great idea that makes me feel so not-great about what I’m doing in this world.” “I know the feeling,” he nodded. This past month, the unintended consequences of forming up those corporate security services to market to the Middle Kingdom had come home to roost. It had, perhaps, been shortsighted of him to assume there was essentially a fixed number of people looking for a regular job as a street brawler, whom you could take out of one location and drop in another. Instead, opening it as a formal career path appeared to have made others consider it. Now all they had were men fighting their own version of a war on the streets in Berun and somewhere halfway across the globe. “So you see why I don’t exactly want her around Visha too much, especially now?” “I do,” he agreed, running his bottom lip under his teeth a few times. “Probably more than anyone I understand where you’re coming from, so I don’t say this lightly.” He clasped and unclasped his hands around his glass a few times, the words not wanting to come out. Taking her side the way Zettour used to was the one thing he’d sworn he wouldn’t do when he’d hired Tanya. He took in a deep breath and forced him to let go of that part of his ego. This was different. It was personal, not political. “I think she’s trying,” he finally said. “If that’s only making it worse, then I’m sorry, but I don’t care,” Elya exclaimed, this time loud enough to make heads turn. “Ms. Serebryakov is no doubt aware of her commanding officer’s eccentricities,” he reasoned, motioning for her to settle down. “For all you know it could be worse were Ms. Degurechaff to suddenly seem not herself.” “It’s a bit funny, you know,” Elya giggled. “What?” “I suppose you don’t know Visha all so well. Tanya, though, even if you aren’t her biggest fan, after all the time you’ve known her, you’re still all ‘Ms. Degurechaff’ like you’re barely acquainted.” “Ah, well,” he said, with a glance up towards the ceiling and a shake of his head. “That’s another story. Should’ve seen her face when she heard me say her first name.” Elya’s eyes danced in amusement at the absurdity of Tanya’s umpteenth idiosyncrasy. “Oh no,” she laughed. “That got her in a bit of a state, did it?” “A bit, yes,” he sighed. “My deepest sympathies, but let me reiterate that you-,” Elya paused, circling her finger through the air before touching it to his nose in a soft poke that indicated she needed no more beer, “-Erich von Lehrgen, are playing a very dangerous game.” “Don’t I know it,” he said, with a rueful smile. There were times he wondered if he’d be less likely to set off a volatile chain reaction playing around with nitroglycerin. Those casualties would be maximized at his wing of the office. “Anyway, my point was that if we don’t give Tanya the space to try, potentially unsuccessfully, we cut that path off entirely, it’ll probably turn out worse for everyone. Visha included.” “I still don’t-,” “I’ll keep an eye out,” he interrupted, before she could object another time. “If it goes on looking like she’s making things worse I’ll figure out how to get Serebryakov sent to a convalescent hospital out your way. You have my word.” Elya held his gaze for a solid five seconds. “Alright. If you do one thing for me.” He nodded. “You aren’t wrong,” Elya said, with a humorless laugh. “That Visha knew her commanding officer quite well. That’s - I think that’s part of the problem.” He said nothing, letting his raised eyebrows do the talking for him. “Sometimes, her letters to me were glowing accounts of the Major did this and the Lieutenant Colonel said that, and these fine, dandy, brilliant things. Other times, they weren’t.” “Really?” he asked. His singular piece of evidence that Viktoriya shared any part of his opinions on Tanya was by her own account of a fleeting first impression. He couldn’t say why he was disappointed there might not be one person blind to Tanya’s flaws, only that he was. Elya heaved a heavy sigh, her manicured fingernails tapping out an anxious beat. “You know she sang, sometimes, to herself, as she went about making mincemeat of other people. We’ve all heard the rumors, I think, but Visha had to see it. Singing and smiling and laughing as she had the time of her life, not a moment’s hesitation for the back of a retreating foe, and from a child. A. Child,” Elya emphasized. “Visha said sometimes it was easier to believe she’d gone mad than to believe the truth her eyes were telling her.” “I imagine all of us who spent enough time with Degurechaff have seen things we’d just as soon forget,” he said, staring into his drink. For him, were he to pick, it was the memory of a girl so giddy with glee she was skipping around the tent while the rest of them digested that the war had grown yet again, Dacia another enemy to add to the list. For others it was listening to her cheerfully calling artillery bombardments right through where her men were flying. For one former lieutenant general who’d found Lehrgen to commiserate, it was watching the slow, satisfied smile of a cat who’d gotten the cream steal over her face as she clarified what the Arene suppression would entail. “It’s why I’m so enamored with letting her fumble her way down a kinder path, I think,” he reflected, after a few seconds spent contemplating the bottom of his cup. “The slightest chance that all that remains in the past seems worth it.” “I understand,” Elya said. “I do. Think, though. If you’re Visha, and you wanted to worship her at the height of her heroism and cower at the depths of her depravity, how could you find it in yourself to chance disappointing her with your weakness?” “That...is a good point,” he conceded. “I won’t lie and say I know how I’ll relay it without sounding offensive. But I will try. And if it doesn’t work, as I said, I’ll help you get transferred up here or Serebryakov transferred to you. How long do I have?” “Until Visha’s next birthday.” “Which is…?” “End of February.” “Deal,” he said, sticking a hand across the table to shake. “Deal,” she repeated. “Now, your turn to complain.” “I won’t be long,” he said, checking his watch. “I have some things tomorrow.” Those things might only include eating a hearty meal and reading in front of the fireplace, but they were things, and he was growing eager for the quiet of home. “Anything I should know about my bosses?” he asked, after sparing a second to the question of whether he had other burdens to relieve. “Romel’s the same as usual,” she said. “You know he came by yesterday when I was saying my farewells. Not to see me, obviously, but he looked over at me getting all excitable with someone and he says - and I have good hearing, so - he goes like this.” She drew herself up in her seat, face set in a firm scowl. “Ahh,” she grunted, voice lowered a register. “That reminds me of a time when I used to give a fuck.” Lehrgen laughed into his beer, though it worried him all the same. A man without a feeling of purpose was prone to growing fond of someone promising to provide one to him. It was why his heart stopped each time he heard Tanya had spoken with their Chief of Staff. “And von Schleichel?” “Hard to keep track of, honestly.” “For you?” “Maybe not if my day job were compiling tidbits of ruinous information so you can get your boss booted out and take his job,” Elya said, with a smile bordering on nasty. “That’s not why,” he defended. “Well, whatever,” she continued. “He knows who he shouldn’t be seen with, politically, so when he’s down at the Reichstag he makes good and jolly with our centrists. But I’m sure he’s aware, international sanctions aside, returning the Army to its full glory isn’t high on their priority list.” Lehrgen gave a knowing nod to the political roadblocks he didn’t hate as much he was supposed to. “Far as I can tell, Schleichel’s at a dinner party with someone off the list of our country’s largest taxpayers every other night,” Elya went on, leaning in towards him. “Which makes the real secret how he still fits in a uniform.” Lehrgen remained silent, only rolled his eyes at her tangential commentary. “So, if and when Romel decides he’s found a fuck to give again, the annual budgeting process might be somewhat more of a suggestion than it’s meant to be,” she concluded. He sighed, nodded, thought about lighting another cigarette, decided not to. The news wasn’t good, but no worse than expected. “Nothing put in motion though?” “Not to my knowledge.” He rose and jerked his head toward the door, then pointed to a cab idling on the sidewalk once they got outside. “You take that one. I’ll get the next.” “No, you take it,” she shook her head. “My hotel’s close. I was going to walk.” “Lead the way, then,” he told her. He followed her down two blocks, over three, then down two more, her narration of what was new, what was in need of renewal, and what had been the same in 1417 so would be the same in 2417 a constant backdrop that made him wonder how he’d lived in the city so long without knowing half as much. “Write with good news,” she commanded, while they stood in front of the door and she clung tight around his chest, his arms raised awkwardly out to the sides. His returning gesture was more of a pat on the back, unsure how anything else would come across. “I will,” he promised. “I will.” 
 December 8, 1930General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 With Elya out of the picture, Tanya no longer needed to act as a counter-influence to her mind-numbing jabber. That meant she could give Visha back some much-needed privacy. A first since the day she’d been conscripted. Tanya had decided on a schedule of two weekday visits after work and one on the weekend, which unlike a certain self-proclaimed best friend, she’d cleared in advance as agreeable to Visha. While the other woman hadn’t made much of an effort to strike up conversation in the past week, Tanya didn’t take it as necessarily a bad sign. You didn’t see her trying to talk about being hit by a train and turned into another person to anyone that would listen. Aside from sounding patently insane, dwelling endlessly on the past could often do more harm than good. On the plus side, not needing to fill every available second with chatter allowed her to double-up on her responsibilities and read or work while she sat in the hospital. As noteworthy topics popped up, she’d make a comment and see if Visha had any interest in conversing. The coming Christmas season would be slightly tricky to navigate. She had no desire to ruin something she knew gave Visha comfort. On the other hand, she was a person of principle. There was no way she would be fooled into spending a day discussing which lessons of Being X’s brought the most meaning to her life. Though in a certain way which she owed him no thanks for, he could be held responsible for giving her a greater sense of purpose. As a last resort, with Weiss unavailable until the new year, she’d considered introducing Erna and Visha. They could spend their holy day trying to convert each other to their particular version of lunacy instead of trying it on her. Thankfully, she’d ascertained that the aunt and uncle Visha had nearby had made arrangements to be around. Visha’s holiday plans were, unfortunately, the least of her Christmas-related woes. Getting anything done in the office was a major battle this time of year. For that reason, her usual Monday-morning trip to Lieutenant Sauer’s desk was especially important. The single useful quality she’d discerned from him in the last thirteen months was an unerring ability to guess when people would be in the mood for a difficult meeting, or which people to avoid sticking in a meeting with each other altogether. “Sauer,” she announced herself, rapping twice at his desk after he’d refused to acknowledge she’d taken the seat in front of him. “Sorry,” he replied, not looking up. “I’ll just be another minute. I’m in the middle of something.” Tanya watched idly while he stared at something in his lap, scribbled some words, crossed them out, started to write again, thought better of it, flipped a page, noted something that he ended in a question mark and circled twice, muttering things to himself like “that won’t work” and “no. But maybe?” Either he was worse at his job than she’d assumed and Lehrgen was keeping him around for reasons she was better off not knowing, or there were some scheduling difficulties with his twelve dates of Christmas. After she’d timed three minutes instead of the promised one, he motioned for her stack of folders so he could have a look at the names of whose calendar she’d need to impose on. “I’ve been meaning to ask,” he said, distracting himself from his task of making notations. “How is it going with Serebryakov?” “It’s going,” she replied, having no relevant updates to give. “I wouldn’t mind coming by,” he dropped in unsubtly. “That won’t be necessary.” She didn’t need to be entirely confident that her strategy for dealing with Visha’s re-entry into the workforce was correct to rule out God’s gift to women merely existing in her presence as a positive force. At best, Sauer would equal Elya’s achievement of providing a worthless distraction. “We were friends, you know,” he said, clearly offended she was immune to his purported charms. “I’m not asking for another reason.” “What were you working on before?” Tanya deflected. She wasn’t Sauer’s manager. Getting caught up in how she felt about his extracurricular activities and how they reflected on the organization he worked for wasn’t a useful expenditure of her time. “Oh, ahh, here. I don’t think there’s any harm in you seeing.” With that, he handed over a disorganized series of notes in his barely-legible scrawl. Buried underneath, Tanya found a slew of official documents marked up in what she recognized as their boss’s graceful penmanship. “You’re allowed to work on things like this?” When it came to delegating tasks, managers often found themselves in somewhat of a Catch-22. Handing off the most difficult work to the most productive employees shifted the lion’s share of the total effort to them and risked negatively impacting their performance on the individual items as more were added; attempting to distribute workloads roughly evenly throughout a team resulted in the weakest links in over their heads. She was sympathetic to the plight Lehrgen faced in an atmosphere where he had little control over who his subordinates were. That didn’t come close to an adequate explanation for why he would assign Sauer to work on projects at the top of his to-do list. At most, she only threw her two cents in when Lehrgen asked for input on the items he kept for himself. Clearly, the contents of the folder themselves didn’t come as a surprise to her. She’d have a far more pressing worry than her employee status if she’d managed to miss that the Army was reorganizing its basic infantry structure. In the aftermath of the war, the forces garrisoned in each location had more or less slimmed down in accordance with a predetermined ratio. Now that a new world order had solidified enough to make semi-accurate predictions possible, questions naturally had arisen as to whether the previous distribution of force made sense. Just as naturally, that answer had been no. Their southern border, while not under threat, hadn’t existed for over fifty years prior to the summer of 1928. Satisfied with reclaiming Norden, their northern neighbors were in many ways less contentious. Their Eastern border was a mess of safe zones and hotbeds, with an exclave to top it off. To the west, the Republic still hated them about the same as the people along their respective sides of the Rhine had hated each other for the past several hundred years. Tanya had been called in to consult on specific points, but so far as her team was concerned, largely the burden of burning the midnight oil had fallen on the boss. Or so she’d thought. Tanya waved a cloud of smoke from her face. To add insult to injury, Sauer had used her stunned silence as an excuse for a cigarette break. The amused, arrogant smile on his face topped it off. “Did you think I was sleeping my way to the top, then?” His lurid suggestion was accompanied by several flutters of his eyelashes in her direction, too perfectly executed for it to be the first time he’d tried doing it. Priding herself on her lack of ability at making eyes didn’t prevent her from being hit with a strange feeling associated with finding an additional arena where Sauer had stolen the lead despite her natural advantage. “I’m sure our boss wouldn’t want to hear you polluting innocent ears with talk like that,” she reminded him, after she’d swallowed past a knot in her throat. Hating society’s double standards for young men and women in no way meant she was above using them to her benefit. “Mm, yes,” Sauer agreed. “Wouldn’t want him thinking I’ve corrupted a model citizen.” Tanya gave a sharp nod. She’d suspected relying on Lehrgen’s old-fashioned values of right and wrong would do the trick of killing that line of conversation in the cradle. “I was surprised because I thought the reorganization was his project, not yours,” she explained. “I still have things I contribute,” Sauer replied, then fixed his gaze on either the cigarette burning down between his fingers or his twiddling thumbs. “You know, just because I don’t make the same decisions you think you would doesn’t mean I’m an idiot.” “I’m perfectly aware,” Tanya stated. It never ceased to amaze her how sensitive someone used to being adored got at the mere hint they had imperfections. “Do you like, ever apologize?” She blinked a few times at the uncalled for accusation. “I always apologize when I’ve done something wrong.” Sauer grimaced and gave an upward jerk of his brow at being disappointed she wasn’t planning on blaming herself for his mistaken impressions. Perhaps if he were senior in rank. Regardless, if they were going to start apologizing for that sort of thing, he owed her one back. She had a very open mind when it came to appreciating people with different talents. What mattered was that the differences proved valuable, which so far, Sauer’s had not. “Fine,” she relented, seeing his face was set and not wanting to earn a reputation of being difficult to work with. “If I’ve mistreated you, I’m sorry.” “Alright,” he said, humoring her with a half-smile. “I’ll take it.” “So,” she said, clearing her throat, “may I ask what in particular you’ve been asked to contribute?” “You aren’t the only one who’s wondered if I’m supposed to be here,” he said, breaking eye contact momentarily in favor of looking at the floor. “I know I can’t compete when it comes to strategy.” “What made you choose this career then?” He scratched the back of his head with his free hand. “It seemed...cool?” he said with a shrug. “Ahh. Okay.” “I was eighteen,” he protested, then shot a glance in her direction. “And a very regular eighteen-year-old. Anyway, my grades were perfectly acceptable, I got myself some good recommendations, and off I went to officer school.” “That doesn’t explain why you’re sitting here instead of doing morning roll-call at some base or other.” “I got up the liquid courage to ask, once,” he laughed. “It’s something like this - most officers in this building are chosen from among the best analytical minds we have. I’ve seen our favorite general do it, doesn’t write anything down, just finds the nearest window, stares out of it, if there’s too much going on out there he’ll take his glasses off, and you can kind of see the cogs turning, because what these kind of positions select for is people who can look at every puzzle piece, all at once, and understand in their head how they’re going to fit it together.” She nodded along with his explanation, making a discreet cough in the hopes he would put out his cigarette. “But,” he continued, “as you’re weaving this grand tapestry in the real world, you end up with some knots in the pattern. You need someone who can untie it by picking at it here, then there, then maybe cutting it and tucking in the ends, without worrying it will unravel something in the far corner.” “You know you switched halfway between a puzzle analogy and a sewing one,” she commented, grasping the gist of what he was trying to explain without much idea of how it translated into an actionable skill. “That’s how it was presented to me. I wasn’t alone in being up to my eyeballs in liquor that night,” Sauer said, smiling at the memory. “Honestly the whole reason I know Lehrgen remembers the majority of the night is because he was so mad at me the next day. So mad.” “What happened?” she asked, curious if she’d need to studiously avoid another round of drinks when the boss offered. A person given to temperamental fits in the aftermath wasn’t one you wanted to be around after hours. “So it was after we’d gotten the peace terms and none of us knew if we had jobs anymore,” Sauer began. “Me especially, I was thinking there was no way they kept me around, which is how we got on the subject to begin with.” Tanya hummed sympathetically. They’d all gone through that. “And if you’re around Lehrgen enough you’ll notice he’s pretty careful with his liquor, specifically. It might take a lot, but he goes from this sort of contemplative, needs to have a good reason for everything kind of person to this attitude of ‘well, why not?’ It’s buried in there somewhere.” On second thought, if and when she was in dire need of a major favor, the drinks would be on her. All of them. Lots of them. “Now, I realize this is happening, which means it’s time to go before anyone we’re with throws out a horrendously bad idea. My intentions were very good,” Sauer explained, sticking his hands out in self-defense. “And you probably remember that summer, it was so hot, and it’s this miserably humid thirty-something degrees out, and I’ve always secretly wanted to take a dip in the canal, you know?” “I can’t say that I do.” “Anyway, I decide let’s do it, so the next thing you know, there we are splashing around. Honestly could’ve killed ourselves trying to swim. Obviously, we made it.” Tanya groaned at the pure idiocy of what Sauer was describing and shook her head a few times. Soldiers had such an unhealthy fixation on risking their lives needlessly. “So after a few minutes, swimming in the canal isn’t as exciting as it sounded, and the water’s warm anyway, so I go to get out and realize our clothing is now in the possession of some girl working the area.” She rubbed her hand over her eyes. She should have guessed Sauer would circle them back to subjects best not mentioned at work. There were several possible endings to the story she would happily go the rest of her life without hearing. Luckily for everyone involved - with a special mention to her mental health - the rest of it was a series of increasingly desperate negotiations, ending with a short chase and a few citizens of Berun seeing more of Ernst Sauer than they wanted to. Or than they’d planned on, at any rate. “You should be glad I’m not your boss,” she reprimanded. “I think it was one of the tamer stories to come out of that night, actually,” he shrugged. “You clearly haven’t heard what some of the others got up to.” “I was moving into a nunnery,” Tanya pointed out. “Fine, fine,” Sauer laughed. “You win for the most boring. Happy?” “You still haven’t explained what your role in the reorganization is,” she reminded him. The burning question of what Sauer could conceivably contribute better than her besides drunken antics weighed heavily on her mind. He gave a small shrug. “Especially during a war, you need the officers in charge of strategy to be very sensitive to how the smallest change will echo across the entire map. That’s probably half the reason we were able to hold on so long.” “Right,” she followed. “The thing is, we have a lot of those people, and they all tend to be blind in the same ways. Sometimes the best way to fix a problem is more clear if you’re limited to seeing three moves ahead instead of thirty.” Tanya squinted in his general direction. The only reason she was alive was because she thought thirty moves ahead instead of Being X’s three. It wasn’t a skill to put down so easily. “When you’ve gone through twenty iterations of a plan and it’s so perfect it makes God jealous, but you’re stuck on something like knowing General von Schwanzkopf will be insulted by his new assignment, and then wonder if you appease him if it will give someone else ideas...” Sauer petered off for a moment. “I asked the right questions, I guess,” he continued. Her companion glanced down at the floor again, for what felt like the tenth time. Someday he’d need to learn to hold proper eye contact. “To figure out what really matters. How we can account for the human elements in the plans without ruining them. Or without getting so caught up in the possible consequences of a change that it feels as if that’s what I’m doing.” “So you work on most of the big projects, then?” Tanya confirmed. He nodded. “Actually, I think Lehrgen was the one who arranged for me to keep my job and keep reporting to him. He should have someone who’s more of a traditional up-and-coming staff officer.” “Must have had to call in a few favors with his old Personnel Department,” she remarked. “I doubt that’s how it went. His entire job is arranging the pieces to fall out how he wants them. He does it so naturally it’s easy to miss that’s what he’s up to. You should be careful.” Sauer stuck a hand over his mouth and looked at her out of the side of his eye. “Don’t tell him I said that.” Tanya dipped her head in gratitude for the advice, unnecessary as it was. Thankfully their boss had a high enough opinion of her own intelligence in that department not to hide his intentions. He’d warned her up front that his endgame was to win her back into enlisting. She mimed zipping her lips, then retrieved her folders to head back to her desk. Her scheduled meetings with the man in question had been more than slightly erratic during the final push to finish the grand project of the moment, which meant it was over a week until she got another chance to prove she was doing more than riding the coattails of her battlefield accomplishments. Worryingly, Lehrgen had next to no interest in her work from the past two weeks. As she was gathering her tottering piles of paper into her arms to bring them over, he appeared at her door dressed to brave the cold and instructed her to do the same. She wasn’t particularly irritated he was too busy to make lunch a separate event from their meeting. What was troubling was she was told not to bother bringing a single thing with her. Upon arrival to one of the local diners, she seated herself in a booth. Shortly, Lehrgen joined carrying a tray with a coffee for her, a plate of strudel for her, and a hot chocolate. Also for her. A chill went up her spine. How bad was the news he was about to give her? “You’ve been visiting Ms. Serebryakov?” he asked. “Yes,” she confirmed. Her first thought was that her new habit of leaving at the stroke of five twice a week had been noticed, and not in a good way. “Any sense of how she’s doing?” “The delicate healing’s mostly done with,” Tanya explained. “Most of what’s left is therapeutic. Soon they’ll have to decide if she’s headed over to the convalescent wing or not.” Lehrgen raised an eyebrow. “The other option being psychiatric care,” Tanya sighed. He took a pack of cigarettes from his pocket and placed it on the table. Two seconds later he put them back. “Degurechaff,” he began, tone serious enough to make her put down her cup. “I’ve read all your reviews. Written more than one myself. So please take what I’m going to say seriously.” She nodded, attempting to keep her face straight despite the coffee turning sour in her stomach. “At a very young age, you performed feats that often felt closer to miracles than anything else. Even to your own men, you may have, at times, seemed more myth than fact.” As she couldn’t object to the term miracle, she tried a bit of the strudel to see if it would soothe her mild nausea. She quickly found herself reaching for the hot chocolate to compensate for a dry mouth. “I don’t know whether Serebryakov ever directly compared herself to you,” he continued, inspecting his fingernails. “Possibly she assumed you were the one drawing that comparison. The fact remains that on a very basic level, you two had more in common with each other than anyone else you served closely with.” “That’s true,” Tanya agreed, totally unable to discern what he thought the problem was. So far, he’d mostly given reasons that Visha should be turning to her for help. “Among soldiers who went through what you did, you remained almost uniquely able to perform your duties at parade-level perfection.” “I only did what came naturally to me,” she interjected, finally finding a way to deflect a compliment so she didn’t look like she was arrogantly basking in the praise being heaped on her. “I...know,” Lehrgen said slowly, eyes drifting over to look out the window for a second. “What I’m getting at is in the end, Serebryakov has come home affected by her experiences in a way you were not. And any similarities between you two may be serving to make her feel that you will be less able to understand why the outcome was so different for her.” “I know what she’s capable of,” Tanya pointed out. “So of course I know whatever it is must be worse. I’ve never asked the impossible of anyone. I appreciate the concern, sir, but I can’t imagine she has any reason to believe I wouldn’t understand that much.” Relieved that was all, she happily dove into her dessert. Halfway through, she realized she’d been rude in not at least offering to share. She caught Lehrgen’s eye when he decided to focus somewhere besides the distance he’d been staring off into, and flipped the handle of the spoon in his direction. He gave a vehement shake of his head with a frown like the thought of eating it was nauseating. There were days she worried her time as a fully civilized human being, one capable of caring about things as minor as sharing utensils or water bottles, was over for good. That being said, her companion was no better than she was. He could stop pretending. “You survived whatever’s floating in the Landeswehr canal,” she reminded him. Despite having nothing to eat or drink, he briefly sounded like he was choking on a non-existent substance. If he was going to be that embarrassed about it, he shouldn’t have done it. And Sauer ought to have warned her that she had other secrets to keep silent about. For a few seconds, Lehrgen’s face warred between the humor he clearly felt the statement deserved and his seriousness as an officer. The former won out. He motioned for her spoon and took a bite, rather sullenly for someone eating a midday treat. “I’m particular about my sweets, is all,” he said quietly, then pushed the plate back towards her. So much for trying to be nice. Though being honest with herself, she’d been hoping not to need to wave a second set of utensils over. More for her. While she went back to eating her snack, Lehrgen went back to contemplating whatever piece of work he’d left in the office that was eating at his mind, offering the occasional sigh to remind her of his presence. “Degurechaff,” he repeated after another minute, tapping one finger on the table. “I don’t mean to press the point, but what if you don’t?” “Don’t what?” “What if, in comparison to what she or you went through in the field, you don’t find Serebryakov’s story compelling?” he asked, pressing his palms together and shaking them. “You might not understand. And that’s okay. No one’s asking you to force yourself to. If you need to be disappointed I’ll listen. What I am asking is that you hide it from her. If there’s ever been a time to not be true to yourself, I think it’s now.” “I see your point,” Tanya conceded. She doubted she’d need to take him up on his offer. Putting it on the table reminded her of a substantial downside she’d need to consider for her next job - few bosses were as accommodating to the whims of their direct reports as her current one was. Theoretically, Lehrgen was in a position to take a more objective view on the subject of Visha’s mindset than she was. It was easy to be fooled by the other woman’s benign appearance. Functionally, Tanya knew he was wrong, of course. “It might not be easy, but will you try addressing it with her?” he asked. “If I need to,” Tanya replied. He held her gaze and then gave a nod. She took a sip of her coffee so it didn’t start to feel neglected. “I didn’t realize you’d put so much thought into it,” she said after a moment, to break the uncomfortable silence that had descended between herself and a person she usually had no difficulty working quietly next to. “When I was out with Elya she mentioned something,” Lehrgen said, waving a hand. “That Serebryakov might be too tough on herself.” Tanya crossed her arms subconsciously. The past week she’d already been hit with the unwelcome realization that without her magic, she was nothing more than a regular employee lacking regular credentials. There were countless better analytical minds than hers out there. She’d accepted that long ago. She wasn’t going to spend another lifetime occasionally reliving her failure to get into Todai. As a child she’d been impressive, though never enough to be pulled from the battlefield. As an adult she was basically average. In her area of expertise - human resources - she was at most second best to Lehrgen, and a distant second if his readings of Sauer and Visha were correct. She didn’t have any particularly unique skills like Sauer. Lehrgen had made his choice over who he’d wanted to fight to keep, and it hadn’t been her. Her lower-ranked colleague could also boast superiority in both the arts of womanhood and finding others’ weaknesses. Unless she wanted to list “has visions of the future” on her résumé, she came up short. From the standpoint of a typical employer, she had nothing specific to recommend her. She understood that perfectly well. But if she was about to hear that in Lehrgen’s opinion, Elya, of all people, gave more insightful commentary than she did, it was time for a new life plan: borrow an orb, import some tequila, challenge Lehrgen to a drinking contest, evaporate her alcohol as she went, then once he was deep in the bottle, ask him nicely to sign a document promising her she could keep her current job plus a decent raise into perpetuity, no matter what. “How do you know Captain Weber?” Tanya asked. “We had a joint assignment during the war.” “And what do you think? Of her?” He cleared his throat. Twice. On some level Tanya could guess what unspoken thoughts had come to mind first. “I feel like I have to apologize,” he said, with a small laugh. “Knowing her and knowing you, I should have warned you she can be a bit much.” Tanya relaxed her posture some. She hadn’t entered mediocre-employee purgatory yet. “I was hoping she’d eventually run out of stories and shut off,” she sighed, with a shake of her head. “I don’t see how she can do her job talking that much.” “I think both of you are doing what you think best for Ms. Serebryakov,” Lehrgen explained. “Because of that you saw the one side of her. When she’s on the job she’s all business. When she’s not…” He paused and rubbed at his forehead. “I swear I know all her boyfriend’s favorite foods.” “I didn’t know she was dating,” Tanya said, perking up in her seat. A romantic commitment in another city was excellent news. It would keep Elya as a visitor to Berun and not a resident. “She never mentioned it.” At her change in attitude, Lehrgen shot a questioning look across the table. From his perspective, she could see how he would be confused as to why she had any feelings one way or another towards Elya’s personal life. “Don’t worry,” Lehrgen said after a moment. “She will.” Mercifully, the ominous tone meant he understood why she might not want Elya around day in, day out, instead of drawing the conclusion that deep down, Tanya was a typical teenage girl looking for gossip. To ward off the despair threatening to set in at the thought of that chatterbox finding subjects she was somehow less interested in than previous ones to go on about endlessly, she finished her strudel and poured the remainder of her coffee into her hot chocolate. Picking a favorite dessert would be hard, but that combination ranked up there on her list. She took a deep inhale to take the scent of it in, allowing the pleasant aroma to calm her and put a smile back on her face. As she breathed out, she let one sarcastic comment escape her mouth. She was among friends here. “Lovely.” 




 

 When I lay me down to die






 
 “To disagree with three-fourths of the British public is one of the first requisites of common sense.”
 
 December 23, 1930General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 It was another two weeks gone by before Tanya had a real meeting with her boss again. Like the last time, he showed up at her door a few minutes in advance, this time to help her carry a month’s worth of files and notes over. The shortage of sleep that finishing his last project before the holidays had caused was more than apparent on his face. “We can do this another time,” Tanya offered, gesturing at the piles of paperwork behind her. She wouldn’t want her hard work passed over lightly so Lehrgen could rush home. Or worse, an exhaustion-fueled bad mood could blow points of disagreement out of proportion. “No, no,” he shook his head. “We both know I’ve put it off too long already. And with Christmas I’ve got five days to sleep. You’re off too, you hear?” Tanya nodded, grateful as always to have a boss that treated her like a human being. A true rarity in the Army. And potentially the wider world, employment law still being in its infancy. Taking care not to linger unnecessarily long on any points, Tanya proceeded with the regular content of their meetings. Her cornerstone achievement had been her participation in the annual review of headcount prior to the grand debate over who deserved more of the budget. In an interesting twist, she’d gone through an exercise that was half an exact replica of her former job, and half the exact opposite. Hunting around for redundancy after the excruciating round of layoffs the Army had suffered was rather pointless. Instead, she’d used her skills for defining roles and responsibilities, estimating required capacity, and grouping tasks together to make a full review of where her department’s manpower was in the most critical condition. Assuming Lehrgen didn’t botch the presentation, he’d soon be picking off his choice of men by ones and twos from other groups. “Degurechaff,” he said, picking up her summary sheet a second time and rubbing at his eyes. “Do you enjoy this sort of thing?” She somewhat unsuccessfully fought off a bout of embarrassment at the deeply suspicious tone. There was nothing wrong with admitting to liking what most others thought of as dull, boring bureaucracy. Dull, boring bureaucracy was safe. Dull, boring bureaucracy was stable. Dull, boring bureaucracy was life. “Is it that strange?” “I would not not have called it,” Lehrgen said, shaking his head in disbelief. He cracked a small smile nonetheless. “You got so into the explanation of your methods I forgot I was tired for a few minutes.” At times, Tanya couldn’t help but feel a twinge of guilt for deceiving Lehrgen into thinking her a better example of an Imperial soldier and citizen than she was. Surely, he wouldn’t have such nice things to say about her otherwise. “Honestly, I’d never have guessed I’d develop a passion for it either,” Tanya said, with a short laugh at herself. She’d gone into her original job with the idea that it was a job, so whether she liked it or not was immaterial, never expecting to find a role as a dry corporate hack one that gave her a new way of understanding how people worked. Though in light of her early demise, there was no getting around that a subset of humanity defied her abilities to comprehend. “It was very interesting for me,” she continued. “Hard as that may be to believe.” In all honesty, Tanya didn’t think she’d seen her boss grin from ear to ear before. He was more of a quick upturn of the lips and then back to serious contemplation man. Frustratingly, she couldn’t prevent her face from reddening. Was it that hilarious that a seventeen-year-old girl would have a knack for deep corporate HR that he was barely holding back from laughing at her? Well, strictly speaking, she wasn’t a seventeen-year-old girl. It was hard to fault someone who pitied child soldiers for having normal opinions about the world. “I could give you more work like this, if you want.” She couldn’t prevent a girlishly stupid smile from beaming off her face. As a child, she’d never experienced the warm cheer of unwrapping the gift she’d been hoping would magically arrive under the tree. The things she’d wanted had been somewhat beyond Santa’s capacity to deliver. “I’d like that,” Tanya replied. Lehrgen’s response had been several times better than the last time - as a twenty-five-year-old man - she’d been asked the same question. Her boss at the time hadn’t said she should get a life, but when a lifelong cog in the Japanese system made you go home early day after day for weeks, you got the point. That mindset was probably what had gotten Mr. Maruyama fired and put her into his position within the year. “Well, next time I’m staffing a project, we’ll talk,” Lehrgen pledged. “I look forward to it. And if you aren’t too tired of hearing me talk yet…” “Just tired. I’m listening.” “Something Captain Weber mentioned has been bothering me.” Lehrgen winced visibly and drooped his head into his hands. “I hope it wasn’t about me.” “It’s about Ostria,” Tanya assured him. Unlike Elya, she had respect for others’ personal secrets. No doubt Lehrgen had one or two skeletons in his closet by this point in his life. Some youthful indiscretion was no business of hers. “Oh,” he replied, perking up. “Ask away.” “It’s probably going to sound like a stupid question,” she admitted. The fact that Elya hadn’t bothered explaining the background had to mean the answer was so obvious that even she had hesitated to find it a worthwhile conversational piece. He raised an eyebrow. “I have to say that makes me more interested in hearing it.” “Right after the war I remember hearing a lot of talk about remaining in a kind of economic union with Ostria,” Tanya began. “Something like the old Zollverein. So much it felt like it was simply waiting on a proper election and a few signatures. Now it rarely gets much space on the page as a serious consideration. I don’t quite understand how that happened.” “And you’d find that a satisfactory state of affairs?” Lehrgen asked, narrowing his eyes. Tanya paused before she got ahead of herself. The industrious disposition of her boss made it easy to forget he was blue-blooded Imperial nobility. Naturally, those types were struggling to accept a permanent separation of Germanic territory more than she was. “A step in the right direction is better than nothing,” she replied, convincingly sincere. While she couldn’t say flirting with international points of tension was a step in the right direction per se, the resulting stability from pulling voters back into the center more than compensated. Historically, Germany’s extreme right had benefited from stealing popular policies from the extreme left. She wasn’t against someone giving them a preemptive taste of their own medicine. “You are looking at it logically,” Lehrgen said, chuckling to himself. “It’s not a stupid question. More of a question with a stupid answer.” He held up a finger as he rose from his seat to indicate he needed a moment, then headed out through his door. “Do you mind?” he asked, returning shortly with a cup of coffee in hand that he held out in her direction. “The pot’s cold and I suspect if I ask Sauer to stand there and heat it up, he’s going to sneak me Sanka instead. He thinks all coffee tastes the same and doesn’t realize some of us notice the difference. I was supposed to be gone an hour ago, so I swore to him the last time it would be my last cup, and I do need to stay awake long enough to buy food before the grocers close for Christmas.” Tanya promptly took the coffee from him. As she was keeping Lehrgen from a reunion with his long-lost bed for personal reasons, it was only fair she made an effort to assist him in avoiding a run-in with the disgraceful state of decaf coffee in the 1930s. “Where are you going?” he asked, seeing she’d stepped towards another corner of the room. “Delicacy is difficult without an orb,” she explained, with a self-conscious smile. “A bathtub gives some margin for error. This’ll explode if I’m wrong. No use getting us both dirty.” “You don’t have to,” he said. “I forgot about that.” “This is as good an excuse as any,” she shushed him. She’d been avoiding heating her own drinks this way and causing herself the hassle of cleaning up the resulting mess if she overestimated, to the detriment of keeping up with a precious skillset. This way, in the case she overapplied her mana, she’d leave Lehrgen feeling indebted to her for trying on his behalf. “I’ve been getting out of practice. I don’t want to find myself playing catch-up when I have a serious need for using magic again.” “Degurechaff,” he said, a bit sternly. “I’m not letting you put yourself in the hospital over Christmas for my sake. Give it here.” On the verge of protesting - she would never volunteer to put herself in harm’s way, only for the minor inconvenience of paying the laundress an extra cleaning fee, which she fully expected Lehrgen to cover anyway - she shut her mouth. She knew an order when she heard one. “Alright,” she sighed, reluctantly returning the cup she was holding. It was a shame to pass up on a rare win-win situation. “But I won’t mind if you change your tune after a sip.” Apparently, Lehrgen agreed that was a possibility, so he didn’t give himself the opportunity to regret his decision. She’d never seen anyone chug a full cup of coffee in one go before. The look on his face once he was finished gave her reason to think she’d never see it again. “That looked pleasant,” she joked. “I’m not drinking it for the experience at this point,” he shrugged. “So. Ostria.” “Yes,” Tanya confirmed, retaking her seat. “As I said, the reason we’ve seen the center largely drop out of the debate is rather illogical,” he yawned. “And I’m glad you asked. Made me realize I haven’t been as immune to that same sort of bias as I’d like to think.” “Happy to help,” Tanya said, leaning her elbows onto the table. “It really comes down to anyone slightly left of center wanting to avoid being painted as a revanchist for supporting some form of Imperial intermingling, and the ones slightly to the right having the same fear of being judged unpatriotic for stopping short of full reunification,” Lehrgen explained, shaking his head. “Somehow, after those battle lines were drawn it became harder to convince people to cross into political no-man’s-land than it was to convince people to run through the type where they actually got shot at.” “I’m sure there are a number of politicians who would take issue with you implying they aren’t at risk of being shot at,” Tanya deadpanned, trying to keep her face straight. In all seriousness, there was nothing funny about a fledgling democracy where assassination was seen as a somewhat valid method of achieving goals. She was not the first one to laugh. She made sure of that. That said, once Lehrgen caught her eye and gave an amused cough, her willpower failed her. “That shouldn’t’ve been funny,” Lehrgen laughed, catching his breath. “No,” Tanya agreed, doing the same, “no, but anyway. Thanks. That makes sense. Everyone in the middle has to choose all or nothing when no one’s willing to be the voice for the center. Even though both sides could find something to celebrate in a compromise.” Lehrgen gave a small frown. “That’s a good way of putting it.” “Not much either of us can do about it,” Tanya shrugged. “I doubt it would make for a popular editorial in the troop circular.” “No,” Lehrgen said slowly, still frowning. “No, not either of us.” “Well, that was all,” Tanya said, standing up. “I won’t keep you any longer.” “Merry Christmas, Degurechaff,” Lehrgen bade goodbye, with another smile and a small wave. “You too,” she called as she left. As soon as she’d ascertained Lehrgen was safely a ways away, Tanya packed up her own things for the day. She had one more stop to make before commencing with a five-day holiday. Truthfully, she didn’t want to go. A visit to the hospital was going to drain away her rare celebratory mood. Her method of providing space for Visha to open up was proving as much of a frustrating dead-end as Elya’s attempts to overwrite all her memories with those belonging to other people had been. That wouldn’t be a pressing problem if she wasn’t aware of a universal truth - the average person procrastinated on making as many changes as possible until after the new year. The administrative limbo Visha was stuck in was likely to be resolved with unwanted vigor when the calendar flipped a new page. For now, her most likely route looked to be a psychiatric facility, and the Empire could wave goodbye to a valuable citizen. As usual, Tanya began by updating Visha on the last few days of her life, and as usual Visha didn’t have much to say about it. That wasn’t terribly surprising, as Tanya’s daily life was almost as uninteresting as she wanted it to be. Once that line of discussion had petered out beyond her ability to resurrect, she took stock of her options. If Visha was interested in the Ostrian elections, she’d missed several opportunities to say so. Tanya was realistic about the prospect of delving deeper into her role in the departmental budgeting equation eliciting any response beyond putting Visha to sleep. She didn’t have any plans for Christmas. Or New Year’s. She couldn’t claim she’d reached the end of her rope until she’d tried out the suggestion Lehrgen had given her. Apologizing to a junior employee for being an outstanding senior was certainly a unique idea. That didn’t completely rule it out as having merit. It had worked on Lieutenant Sauer. “Serebryakov,” she said, tapping Visha’s hand twice to make sure she had her full attention. “Yes, ma’am?” Visha said, chin snapping up to attention. “You don’t have to tell me anything you don’t want to,” Tanya cautioned. She cleared her throat and checked to make sure Visha was listening. “But the war is over. I don’t expect you to put on a brave face. And I’m sorry if I did something to make you think you need to.” Tanya wasn’t typically one for qualifying tears as better than nothing. In this case, they signified progress, one way or the other. “Sorry,” Visha sniffed, wiping at her eyes. “It’s embarrassing to admit so it was easier not to talk much. I didn’t know how to make anyone understand. Still don’t.” “You aren’t at fault, so there’s nothing to be ashamed of,” Tanya reasoned. “No, I-,” Visha looked down at her blanket and gulped. “I almost wish something worse had happened. That sounds so terrible to say. I know I’m lucky, I just don’t feel like it.” Tanya looked down at her hands until she’d schooled her confused expression into something more neutral. Lehrgen had been correct on more counts than one. Though she would challenge anyone above age thirty-five to react more sympathetically to a one hundred percent illogical and dramatic declaration from a young person. “Why don’t you try explaining,” she asked. Once this was over, they could move along and she could work on turning Visha into a respectable adult again. Unsurprisingly, spending all that time with Communists had regressed her back into a frivolous teenager who took things for granted. “It wasn’t so bad, at first,” Visha said, very quietly. “The Red Army has female soldiers too, and the colonel that took me prisoner made sure there was always going to be one around. Since I was an officer I got a proper little room. They even brought a doctor in to look at my legs, but magical science isn’t so advanced there. I think they made it worse. It did make the pain go away.” Tanya nodded to herself. That explained why she’d heard a doctor mutter that Visha was more work than having to rebreak and reset a hundred bones. “I tried to talk to the guards to pass the time. I overheard one girl talking about her family to another during shift change. When I asked, it…” Visha paused and gave a sigh. “They were reminded I understood their conversations perfectly. It was the only time I was ever treated harshly.” “How bad was it?” “Not so bad as your training,” Visha said, with a tinkle of laughter. “So that wasn’t the worst part. I know it was for my own safety, but I was separate from everyone else, I never had anyone to talk to, and anyone I did hear talking I wasn’t supposed to listen, and for a long time all I could think about was all the things I’d seen and done the past few years. You probably don’t know what it’s like to wake up in a cold sweat, but for more than a year that’s how every day started for me.” “It’s happened to me once or twice,” Tanya commented, finally beginning to grasp what the problem was. “Really?” “Yes,” she confirmed. “And as I said before, it’s nothing to be embarrassed about. You were conscripted into a war through no fault of your own.” While not strictly held in conditions of solitary confinement, the length of time Visha had spent without normal socialization was nothing to take lightly. Add to that a healthy dose of PTSD and anyone would be in a precarious mental state. To top it off, Visha was infected with the collective national shame associated with admitting to not having thoroughly enjoyed combat, a stance which got more insane every time Tanya thought about it. The people who weren’t bluffing about getting a kick out of it were quite obviously the more worrisome specimens of humanity. Though she wasn’t keen on surrounding herself with those sorts in her everyday life, she would admit they’d made for a useful battalion. “I did get past it, eventually,” Visha continued. “Well, mostly, at least. To keep my thoughts from drifting places I didn’t want them to, I’d concentrate on other things and now I...I guess I have an easier time paying attention to the ridges on my fingernails, or something, instead of what’s going on around me. I know that must sound awfully stupid.” “It doesn’t to me,” Tanya replied. She figured it was best to keep it simple and leave it at that. Visha was undeniably aware that the opinion was an uncommon one, both types of trauma she’d suffered being poorly understood at the present. Tanya couldn’t exactly explain hers was informed by a body of research that didn’t yet exist. Thankfully, she hadn’t given Visha any hints of her mistaken impression earlier, so needed to make no further apologies. “Thanks,” Visha said, hiccupping out a few more tears. “And thanks for trying to help. I know I’ll be a pain until I’m back to normal.” “It’s worth it,” Tanya shrugged. She wasn’t unaware that she was lacking in both the impetus and the skill to form friendships easily. Encouraging improvement in a person she knew to be capable of improving was a safer bet than trying to find another woman around her physical age that didn’t annoy her half to death. She’d barely tolerated the company of the average high schooler when she’d been in high school. And as she’d been forced to realize, keeping close company solely with men more of the age she’d once been on occasion came with its own difficulties. “Thanks,” Visha repeated. “I wasn’t sure if...if you really cared. I wanted to think so. I thought maybe I’d been forgotten after the war ended.” We aren’t in Hollywood, Tanya thought, looking away so she didn’t roll her eyes. Perhaps Visha wasn’t frivolous, but she did have a flair for the dramatic at times. Her battalion’s lofty opinions of her fighting abilities didn’t make her an action hero. No amount of praying at the Type 95 would have let her stage a one-man rescue from a hostile foreign country’s prison camps. “I tried my best,” she admonished. “Okay,” Visha said. “I know. I think I can be okay with that.” She turned so she was facing Tanya more directly and stuck out an arm. “Friends?” The confirmation felt slightly unnecessary. Taking Visha’s perspective, she could see why it didn’t feel that way. This was their first real conversation as equals. Treating your manager as your friend without clearing it with them first was a recipe for professional failure. “Friends,” Tanya said, holding out her own hand to shake. Out of everything Visha had done so far, flopping down onto her bed and turning to face the opposite wall for no apparent reason ranked as the least anticipated. “Sorry,” she repeated, in what sounded like a chipper voice. “If you don’t mind, I need some time to...I never thought I’d say it again, but I think I’d like to be alone.” “Of course,” Tanya said, standing up. “Have a good Christmas.” Visha’s voice remained steady to reply to the sentiment. Nonetheless, Tanya could see her shoulders trying not to shake. The sudden chat she’d forced on the other woman had no doubt been overwhelming for someone who’d talked so little recently. If there was one thing she had no desire to invite herself to, it was someone else’s private crying session. She most certainly wouldn’t want an audience in the unlikely event she needed one of her own. After a pleasant day spent doing nothing of particular consequence mid-week, Tanya woke up Christmas morning refreshed and ready to pursue a point of personal interest with the rest of her holiday. Over the past three months, she’d made errant notes on what she remembered of theory when it came to managing production of physical merchandise. Working for a technology company, she’d been rusty on the finer points of the durable goods sector. A solid block of time to gather her thoughts into an orderly recommendation had escaped her until today. Before too much time passed, she did owe her connection from her tour of the Grupp factory her expertise. She’d found her solid block of time, but lacked the ambiance to get into the headspace for academic work. The apartment next door, overflowing with visiting relatives since Saturday, was serenading her with the joyous noises of a mother- and daughter-in-law arguing over the meal they were preparing. Her pajamas weren’t helping either. A brief consideration of her options told her that she’d find peace, quiet, and free coffee at her desk. Tanya promptly gathered the sheaves of paper she’d need, and a short ride on the subway later settled herself into the place where she did her best work. As far as she could tell, the main problem Imperial heavy manufacturing was facing was inflexibility in responding to consumer demand. True, an army might change its mind on which model of tank they wanted mass-produced or what caliber to make artillery pieces; it did not, however, let each soldier select their favorite rifle or decide how many rounds they felt like carrying that day. Once a contract was locked in, demand for matériel was comparatively predictable - more of the exact same thing until you were told otherwise. That wasn’t to say aligning Grupp’s practices with existing household goods companies would keep their books in the black. Established names in the sector had trials of their own. The emergency influx of cash from America to ward off hyperinflation hadn’t magically righted the economy in its entirety. In many ways, the corporate situation wasn’t dissimilar to that of post-war Japan: meager cash reserves, required to import many raw materials, and unable to boost profits by slimming down the workforce any further. Tanya started off by grouping her notes into similar piles by concept. A handful of generic advice she could eliminate off the bat. The company in question had as much pre-computerized expertise as she could expect when it came to controlling for defects or managing system load. A half-hour of organization later, she’d landed on a two-prong improvement strategy. First up would be reducing upfront expenses. Being able to produce a million of something cost-effectively was significantly less challenging than doing the same for batches of one hundred at a time. While she couldn’t say with any specificity how a plant she’d wandered around for a few hours should retool its individual processes to achieve that, she could assume there were people within the company who would know the answer once she’d raised the question. The key pointer she did include was to reconsider overspecialization, of both workers and equipment. Machines and people that couldn’t switch tasks without lengthy lead times were the enemy of responsiveness. Her second section covered points more along the lines of how to operate in an environment of inconsistent demand, where inventory stockpiling was a losing proposition. Value stream maps, supplier networks, identifying bottlenecks, and with her apologies to the future intellectual property of the Toyoda family, an overview of the kanban system for replenishing inputs continuously to avoid overcapacity. As a result of some dedicated practice, Tanya was handy enough with her typewriter to produce not one, but two copies of her report by the time she was hungry enough to seek out dinner. She’d put one in the mail on Monday and keep another for reference. Before she left, she jotted out a handwritten note to preface everything, apologizing for the delay, giving the standard well-wishes for a long and fruitful relationship, and for modesty’s sake adding in that she hoped her humble suggestions could tide the company over until the good times returned, as though she wouldn’t be a substantial part of the reason the good times returned. Now that she had nothing pending on her schedule, taking the time to walk home was sounding like a pleasant send-off to the evening. The weather was in a rare agreeable mood for the time of year. But first, food. A small selection of Berun’s restaurants remained open through the holiday. Having no desire to suffer through pitying glances from everyone in her chosen establishment for the crime of being by herself, Tanya opted for a street vendor outside Brandenberger Tor, space on a bench, and a cup of glühwein. No one could claim she didn’t deserve it. The lure of eternal paradise had never made much sense to her. Putting aside philosophical questions about the relationship between time, meaning, and happiness, any truly benevolent deity would consider her a shoo-in for a rewarding afterlife. She didn’t see anyone else in the country taking pains to coax a notorious arms supplier out of the military-industrial complex with the carrot of profitability based on consumer spending. The global elite had more allegiance to money than anything else. So long as peace and stability remained in their financial interest, they’d make every effort to avoid disrupting it. Glancing up to survey the street, she thought she saw a familiar face in the crowd. Whoever it was had disappeared by the time she scanned the area again. Oh well, she shrugged, taking another bite of food, mind absently drifting to another line item on her list of good deeds for the year. Visha had turned the corner and was off to a new start. In any sane system, Tanya would be considered a regular saint. xXx “Erich?” he heard, followed by two snaps cutting through humid air dense with woodsmoke and gingerbread. “Were you listening to anything I just said?” Before answering, he pushed Marian through doors held open by red-jacketed doormen into the pine forest and winter spices of the Hotel Adlon, then followed promptly behind. Every time he came he watched the lobby staff to see if he could figure out the trick to how they got it to smell so fragrant without bags of spices hanging from the ceilings. At this point, he wouldn’t be halfway surprised to learn they sent someone to go mull cider in the ventilation shafts. Thoughts like why he’d seen someone he’d specifically told not to work over Christmas in her work clothes not a five minute walk from her workplace, how petty the entire office must think him for ruining her holiday two years in a row over personal differences, and what kind of bad reputation Tanya was going to end up giving him floated off to be tucked somewhere for later. Among the many things his first friend couldn’t stand were people not paying attention to her when they were supposed to be. “You were saying that the brighter paint on the balcony rail looks cheap,” he replied, satisfied he’d passed his pop quiz. As soon as he’d arrived for the Christmas party, Marian had accosted him in the lobby and insisted on going back outside so he could hear her critique of the facelift that management was giving the hotel where she made a home whenever she was in Berun. “No, I was saying that if they’re going to paint it a brighter color, they have to repaint the trim on the windows or it will look cheap.” She briefly interrupted to give their names to the attendant at the ballroom door, a peremptory “von Tahnoff and von Lehrgen,” that would have intimated their teenaged gatekeeper into letting them pass even had she not stood tall enough in heels to look most men square in the eye. Then her attention was back on him. “The fresh paint on the balcony draws you to look and then you can see the white isn’t so white around the windows behind it anymore. What was it?” “Nothing.” He shook his head and peered around discreetly for a distraction. For all the grandeur of the lobby, the ballroom was rather plain, its flat coffered ceiling and evenly-spaced glass doors with their high half-moon transoms the same as they’d been since he’d seen them for the first time. He’d begged Marian - twice - for an early night, so as of yet the room was no more than half-full, pairs and pairs of pairs clustered together whispering quietly as they waited for the moment when the buzz of enough quietly whispered conversations overpowered the music and signaled that the party had started. “I never thought I'd wish people would work less,” he commented, after determining nobody within eyesight had on an outrageous outfit. “I assume you’re talking about a certain Mr. von Lehrgen,” she sniped back. “Given that today of all days he can’t get his mind off of it long enough to listen to me.” “Oh no,” he laughed. “There’s someone out there who’s got me beat. And it is not a close contest.” “I doubt that,” she sniffed. The timely appearance of a champagne tray interrupted the well-deserved ribbing. Each glass on the laden-down silver tray bubbled with the energy of a freshly uncorked bottle, their pours so even none had a hair more or less than the others. He hesitated briefly in the absence of sufficient selection criteria, then picked the glass from the center. “You know,” she remarked, lifting her glass to clink against his, “in Ostria you’d be Mr. Lehrgen now. And I thought we’d gotten carried away stripping out non-inherited titles.” “You’re no monarchist.” “No, but our names are our names,” she declared. “I’ve so far refused to marry and become someone new. I’d certainly refuse it if some bureaucrat tried to make me.” “I wanted to talk to you about what you’re going to write on Ostria,” he said, taking the opportunity to get duty out of the way now that they were on the subject. She glanced at him, held up a finger, and gulped down her champagne. “You’ll need to buy me a few stiff drinks before we get there,” she replied, as she waved for another glass. She took two. “I thought the rule now was whoever has the bigger bank account pays. That puts me on your tab.” “You’re surprisingly modern when it suits you.” He made a sniff of laughter. “Says the woman who’s surprisingly old-fashioned when it suits her.” “I was the one who recommended you so you could join a club that has the funds to buy out the ballroom here on Christmas.” Her heel clacked against the floor when she stamped it down for emphasis. “You owe me.” “Ah, yes, thanks for giving me the honor of paying the exorbitant dues.” Unconsciously, his hand went to touch his wallet. “Now, were they to buy it out for New Years’, I’d consider it worth it.” “I wanted to make sure you didn’t become a shut-in.” A hand went to go lay on her heart in mock concern. “And you’re a bit cheap so I knew if you paid you’d go by sometimes and talk to people. Maybe even ones you don’t know. Which is required for your career to move along, assuming I’m not much mistaken.” “I am so glad I don’t have a sister,” he said, finishing his own drink and taking Marian’s extra out of her hands. “What’s that supposed to mean?” “I can’t imagine how much more of a busy-body you’d be were we actually related.” “I’m sure my brothers would love to complain to you,” she offered, with a knowing smile. “They’re all older than you are.” “And you think that means they don’t need my advice?” Marian asked. “In any case, we both have other people to meet before we’re free to waste the rest of the night on each other. Come find me at eight, insist you must have whichever dance is going on, and rescue whoever it is I’m arguing with.” She marched off, not waiting to hear his agreement. Erich scouted out a tray of the punch he’d seen circulating before he faced the crowd. Choosing the first group he’d join for conversation among the throng of already-formed circles showing him their backs took a touch of magic each time he went anywhere by himself. A friend who would make room as soon as they met eyes. A tidbit of news an acquaintance wouldn’t mind being interrupted to hear. If he was lucky, someone would intercept him before he got his drink - from the bar where he could wait alone without looking out of place - and they’d form a group of their own as naturally as everyone else seemed to make it happen. He blamed his early years in the countryside for not nurturing the same talent in him, the childhood gatherings governed by older brother and older almost-sister. A rotating calendar of visits between estates of family and friends had dictated the majority of whom he’d speak with and when. At the odd party children were invited, in the courtyard after church, during the summers spent sweltering on the beach in Kranz, allowed to wade no deeper than the trousers or underskirts pinned up to their knees, where they’d splashed water on each other to cool off because it was worth the raw radish dinner the nanny would give them for ruining their clothes, he’d been perfectly content to follow along while Otto or Marian or both dragged him along behind. The times the other two had disagreed, Marian won. She’d been born smart, smarter than him or his brother. Right at the beginning, she’d figured out that so long as no one was watching, she was allowed to push Otto and the older boy wasn’t allowed to push her back. Later, she’d learned that when she pushed with words, no one their age was capable of pushing back. Over the years, Erich had found it easier to compensate for the missing skill set than to improve upon it. Other officers were glad of the opportunity to come along and be inducted into the exclusive world of good names or good numbers in bank accounts; Erich was glad of the company and the natural ice-breaker making introductions provided. Like with most things, getting started was the hardest part. Once he’d shouldered his way into one informal cluster, the next followed along organically, and an hour into the night he’d be talking to someone he’d never met like they’d known each other their whole lives. His ears picked up his name and sweetened the sip of punch he’d taken until he concentrated. That was his boss’s voice. He looked around to see who else was nearby, anyone else, for him to strike up a chat with, saw nothing friendly aside from tablecloths hanging low enough to duck under. Obedient feet took him across the floor, beneath the archway hung with mistletoe that led towards the bar, no single women passing under it for him to pull aside in a last act of desperation. “What are you doing here?” he asked Schleichel. “Shouldn’t you be with your family?” “Ah, well, duty calls, duty calls.” He nodded his head toward where Marian’s head of dark hair could be seen holding court. “And maybe tonight you’ll take me up on my multiple requests for an introduction to your countess over there.” By the end of the night, Schleichel would make sure one or more guests would leave ready to fulfill their patriotic duty by laying down what they valued most - their money, donated to the right candidates. Marian wouldn’t be among them. Once upon a time, the two might have been friends. Both were politicians at heart, both had been wary of the heavy-handed retaliation which turned a border violation into five years of trans-continental mayhem. Marian had spent those years having that conviction vindicated failure after diplomatic failure. Schleichel had spent them commanding from the front lines, his nightly casualty report proving him right and proving what it took to deal with people who didn’t want to reason with them. Three years on the Eastern Front had convinced him the Federation would never want to reason with the Empire, and one or the other had to go. For Schleichel, there could be neither compromise nor a moment lost in rebuilding an army capable of marching on Moskva. Lehrgen didn’t take issue with the sentiment, only the method. Best case scenario, amassing a force obviously meant for more than defending the east put them into a long and difficult war with the Federation, and no matter what temporary allies promised, the rest of Europa once the Empire dealt with the Communists for them. Lehrgen sighed. “You know as well as I that you two won’t agree on anything.” “I can change a woman’s mind easier than a man’s,” Schleichel winked. Maybe Lehrgen would have laughed if it weren’t Marian. Probably not. His brother would laugh. And know what to say to earn a laugh back. The summer their family visited Dubrovnic, Otto accidentally walked his way into a wedding reception at the Rector’s Palace by virtue of looking confident he belonged. There was a picture out there of him dancing with the bride. “That’s not what your wife tells me,” Lehrgen replied, though he was sure the delivery didn’t have quite the panache it was supposed to. It earned him a clap on the back and a hearty chuckle for his trouble, not the punch the insinuation deserved. On one of their deathbeds, he’d tell Otto how many times he’d pretended to be him around people for whom speaking knowledgeably wasn’t enough. Schleichel moved along to another subject, and Lehrgen thought maybe he would take him to go meet Marian, if solely to avoid standing there listening while praise was heaped on Tanya’s name by an ardent admirer. Like a cat that had unilaterally chosen an owner, which to a cat was synonymous with a servant that provided it with everything it wanted in return for its fickle affections and occasional doorstep trophies, by force of personality Tanya had made herself an uninvited guest into the lives of most everyone in the Imperial Army, though perhaps no longer an entirely unwelcome one in his. Not all the time. Regardless, the good he was beginning to see in her was that which made her like other people, not the good his colleagues saw - that which set her apart. Eventually, Schleichel got to his point. He wanted a meeting with Tanya, just the three of them, as Lehrgen must have approved of her suggestions to send them along to Romel. Lehrgen wasn’t sure why he would have disapproved. Yes, that document she’d turned in a few months back in which she’d reasoned that armies were for killing people and anyone not directly involved in the business should be fired to cut costs had been impenetrably outlandish, but she’d kept herself on track. Her focus had been on marginal efficiency gains within legally prescribed limits, a caveat which Schleichel presumably thought belonged in the same trash heap as their treaty. “It will be good to have an excuse to meet her,” Schleichel concluded. Well, Lehrgen thought, if that’s all. While it hadn’t been his choice of conversations, it did the trick. Wilhelm the old Army pilot ambled over to join their corner, and upon determining that Erich couldn’t drive a single type of vehicle, guided him over to Hermann the engineer, who spent a half hour attempting to explain how combustion engines worked, which largely made him more positive he’d made the right decision leaving their operation up to someone else. Taking care as he weaved around waiters with towering trays of glassware and through pairs dancing more to the beat of their holiday spirits than the music, by the time the appointed hour for his rendezvous with Marian arrived, he was fifteen minutes late, which would turn into twenty by the time he begged his leave of Rudolf the plastics entrepreneur. When he and Marian took to the floor, she danced as flawlessly as she did everything else, the muscles beneath his hands supporting posture so tautly poised it was closer to frozen in place. At fourteen, he’d confided in his roommate at school that no drill sergeant would be near as effective at instilling the fear of God into his charges as the governess Marian had loved to hate. Hertha’s passing may well have been the only time Marian ever cried aside from her own father’s funeral. Watching his friend’s face - vibrant, full of laughter and life - it was impossible to think they were now the same age as the woman they’d called the old maid. “What are you smiling about?” Marian asked. “That time I leaned back for a half-second while I was eating with you and got stuck with a pin.” “I told you Hertha sewed them into the backs of the chairs. It was your fault for not believing me.” “She did know how to teach a lesson,” he chuckled. A couple who’d been partaking liberally of the bar’s offerings sent him backpedaling a few passes out of turn, and he was captivated for a moment by legs kicking higher than was either advisable or appropriate and feet coming down in bold steps that would have tripped over their hemline had dresses still fallen all the way to the floor. “I have a random question for you,” he said, turning back to Marian, recalling a promise he’d made to himself half a year ago at the thought of teachers and lessons. “Do you know who I’d want to talk to if I needed to waive some administrative details for granting a secondary school diploma? Or anything of that nature?” “Not really,” she frowned. “Might I ask why?” He hummed in disappointment, knowing he’d have to tell her a white lie and take it to his grave. Over the last year, he hadn’t been proactive in building a resistance-free path into another life for the Army’s most dedicated employee. Telling Marian the real reason wouldn’t make her keen on helping him. Suffering from illusions of idealism was a privilege he’d given up long ago. No version of any ideal paradise he’d heard preached included competition, much less war. He paid his bills by making the most out of what he’d been given. And he, in God’s infinite wisdom, had been given Tanya. Ideally, you didn’t go out of your way to help people whom you fundamentally disagreed with, no matter how friendly they’d become on the surface. Realistically, when Tanya wasn’t triggering every alarm bell he had by doing her best to be her worst, he got better results concentrating on the parts he liked about her than the ones he didn’t. That was how, at long last, he’d gotten himself his best Christmas gift in years and found something mundane and harmless that she enjoyed applying her talents to. Marian was famous for her opinions, her world a world of unequivocal stances. She knew Tanya as an archetype, and one whose concept she unequivocally hated to its core. Tanya was the representation of everything that had been wrong with the old Empire. One day, Marian would find out he’d hired Tanya, and as an underaged employee no less, and on that day, Erich would find out if Marian had truly grown out of her hitting phase or had merely been suppressing it for thirty-five years. “There’s a whole group of boys that were conscripted before they finished school,” he explained. “I’ve taken an interest in correcting the issue.” “Trying to earn your way back into heaven?” Marian snickered. “Last I knew, you were magnificently nonchalant about our country’s use of child soldiers.” Among other things, Lehrgen sighed to himself. His days Before Crossing paths with the reductio ad absurdum of the Army’s core philosophies and the ones After Degurechaff often seemed like different lifetimes. “I read the research,” he stressed. They’d argued this point years back, when he’d first been posted in Personnel. “Mages are precocious. You can go read about it yourself. And besides, it was a better job than what anyone else could get at thirteen or fourteen.” “Just one little question,” she said, removing her hand from his arm to pinch her thumb and forefinger together. “Who was it that funded the research again?” He was not unaware that in itself, his silence was damning. It was better than saying the answer out loud. “Go on,” Marian encouraged upon noticing. “Say it.” “The Army,” he muttered. “But it was a proper study.” “And you don’t think there was any hint of bias in there?” she asked, pursing her lips and nodding to herself. “Not the teensiest bit?” “Okay, I get it, I made a mistake, alright?” “I get it, I made a mistake, alright, is for when you’ve gotten drunk and said something rude. Not criminal negligence.” “Then help me make up for it, if you’re quite done,” he snapped. “Now, now,” she chided, then reached up to pat his cheek. He knocked her hand away. “I’m not in the mood Marian. I’m really not.” “Don’t be testy,” she admonished. “I’m only pointing out - hey - Erich.” Her call went ignored and he continued over to take a seat at an open table, where he was sure a waiter would soon be by to take his drink order. The year was ending on a high note. Tanya was turning out to be a successful work-in-progress. The economy wasn’t getting worse. Communism hadn’t swept the country. He’d found his favorite pair of gloves, missing for over a year, in a coat pocket. Earn his way back into heaven. Marian didn’t know what she was talking about. If using the chance he’d been afforded to steer the Army away from reaching for extremes again didn’t count, then nothing did. His gaze fixed on the bartender along the far wall, on the smooth waterfall of dark honey cascading down from a bottle held a half meter above the cup, though from the corner of his eye he could see Marian walking towards him, because she made it her life’s work not to do what was expected of her. While she silently took a seat across from him a bottle of orange-tinged amber was pulled off its shelf, tossed behind the back, caught, and tipped upside down so fast it seemed a trick of the light. As Marian’s stare weighed heavy on the air between them, the lemon juicer spun open and twirled shut in a performance for an audience of one, directly followed by the sound of a metal case clicking open and snapping shut from his left. The smell of smoke drifted across to him, concentrating his senses on it and obscuring the faint chink of ice rattling along to an unknown beat. She cleared her throat. “I’m sorry?” she tried. He glanced her way long enough to see a sheepish smile. “Me too,” he sighed. “I really don’t know who you should talk to about this educational quandary,” she apologized. “But I might know where to start.” He relented and turned to face her. “I can’t for the life of me remember his name. He was at the - ohh…” she snapped her fingers a few times trying to recall. “You were there too. That party a few years back at the von Ulenbergs.” “I think half the country was there,” he nodded. “Jeanne does know how to put on an event,” Marian laughed. “You’ll remember this guy. He had that beard.” She held her hands down towards her navel, which was all the help his memory needed. “Not a forgettable character,” he agreed. “Anyhow, I don’t know his name, but I did ask around about the resident wizard and I’m sure he was on some council or board that dealt with curriculums. Jeanne will know who he is.” “Well, let me know what she says.” “I’m not calling her,” Marian snorted. “That’s your job. Her husband was an Army man once upon a time, no?” “No - yes, he was, but I can’t,” he said, waving his hand. “I don’t know that Siegfried will take my call. He was a colonel back when I was a lieutenant getting a taste of action in Alsatia. Apparently, I asked one too many questions.” The nearly twenty intervening years hadn’t made the scene any less fresh in his mind. A baleful stare, a brusque harrumph, and an admonishment that unless the day ever came that it was Lieutenant General von Lehrgen settling himself into the Chief of Staff’s chair and looking down on them all from on high - Colonel von Ulenberg hadn’t appreciated having to look up to address his nineteen-year-old aide - the newly minted First Lieutenant up through Major General von Lehrgen would be a thorn in the seat of the man who was in charge. A need to have reasons for everything was the first step on the path that led to open defiance. Or so he was told. “You? Ask too many questions? No,” Marian gasped with a laugh. “Don’t call him then. Call Jeanne.” “I can’t just start corresponding with someone else’s wife.” “I don’t know,” Marian said. “If I were in my sixties, married, and my husband suspected a man in his thirties was taken with me, I’d consider it grounds for divorce if his main reaction wasn’t flattery at the competition. It’s a shame beauty has never been one of my virtues.” “You’re impossible,” he said, putting his head in his hands, rubbing at eyes that were beginning to grow tired again. “And you’re...you’re a handsome woman. Maybe you should call Siegfried.” “Don’t try flattery,” she laughed. “I bawled my eyes out in front of the mirror once when I was twelve and never cared again.” “Fine,” he acquiesced. “Fine. I’ll do it.” Had he wanted to make a grand gesture of rebellion against the Army, he and Colonel von Ulenberg both knew a world war would’ve been the time. Contrary to the old man’s belief, there were stopping points along the road between curiosity and committing treason. Chateaubriand for two came steaming out for them and arrested table talk. Thick cuts of steak pink all the way through, pale yellow Béarnaise oozing straight down the center and spilling out to meet the rim of the plate. The creamed spinach and potato salad, each presented neatly enough to be the centerpieces of a different meal, sat off to the side to be picked at guiltily between bites of the main course. A bottle of Sainte-Emilienne came along with the food. Marian had ordered it, but she indicated he was to perform the tasting. He never thought the day would come that she’d consider him grown up. As he chewed his first bite, he wondered why he didn’t treat himself more often. He said that every year. Inevitably, he went back to the same five meals he could cook blind. The rare pleasure of luxuriating in what was on his plate made him forget he’d come for any reason besides eating it. A string band played in Strausse in the background - it sounded like Strausse. Whatever the tune was, it filled in the empty space his thoughts normally took up. It wasn’t until Marian dabbed at her lips and started in on the months she’d spent in Ostria that the world outside came back into existence. “I have something of a request for the piece you’re going to write on it,” he told her, sensing she was near to launching into a diatribe about various political factions. “Yes?” “You aren’t going to like it.” She paused while lifting her fork to her mouth and put it back on her plate. “For future reference, journalists generally don’t like representatives of the government telling them what to write.” “And I’m at most representing the regime insofar as all regimes in power desire stability.” He pushed his own plate away, full already. “Put the middle ground back on the table. There’s no good reason we need to treat Ostria like they’re an entirely separate people. We don’t need the border formalities.” Marian turned around and waved at a waiter. “What are you doing?” “Informing the staff not to serve you anything more to drink,” she said, glancing at him and then addressing herself to the server while pointing back at him. “He-,” “Will take two glasses of your best Sauternnes,” Erich cut in. “On me.” “It had better be,” Marian huffed, with the same look on her face she used to get when she hadn’t been above kicking underneath the table. The waiter walked away and she leaned closer. “You do realize you’re the briber here? You should have ordered a good Imperial vintage. This place gets a seat at the Schwarzhofberger auctions. Am I not worth it?” “This is our dessert, and Sauternnes are heavier than what we make,” he huffed, to her insinuation he consider spending a week’s salary on soothing her ruffled feathers. “Look, Marian, people listen to you.” “Yes, because I write sensible things,” she said, stabbing at his plate, her own eaten clean. “No. The left is compelled to listen because you make their positions sound like the sensible thing. The right because you kept your title in your name and when they read Gräfin in the byline they can’t help it. You’re a relic of the past they can’t let go of.” He paused for a breath, finishing his wine along with it. “And I suspect if you had no concern for your reputation you’d never have left the center on this issue.” “You have no concept of how hard I’ve worked to earn that reputation.” She leaned back in her chair and crossed her arms. “Power and influence were laid out for you. A powerful and influential husband for me.” “I know, Marian. I know. I - sorry. I shouldn’t have asked. But you’re the only person I know well enough to do it.” She drummed her fingers on the table. “Tell me why and I’ll consider it.” He reached across to her side where she’d dragged his food for a last forkful. “Because I’m an incorrigible elitist and can’t stand the thought of populism from either direction deciding our future,” he joked. “Besides that.” “Well, as you know, I work with a number of people whose politics you would strongly disapprove of,” he coughed. They shared a smile at that, and he came up with his second white lie of the evening. Tanya was the smartest one in the office and she was fooled into believing that signing an official agreement to go back to a checkpoint-free, tariff-free arrangement was a step in the direction of a reunified Empire, when in fact it would be a step into the wet cement of good enough. What more proof did he need? “After surveying an extensive number of them I have concluded that people who are very single-minded about Imperial reunification don’t realize most other people aren’t,” Erich continued. “You know this better than I do, but as I understand it, making what appears to be progress on the issue will steal the electoral support of people who care about other things too. Here and Ostria. At least for however long it takes people to realize there’s nothing more forthcoming, and that will be years.” Two glasses, upside-down pears of liquid gold, were set down between them by white-gloved hands, the waiter’s announcement of Chateau d’Yquemme, 1893 causing a wince Erich did his best to conceal from Marian. His birth year shared the distinction of producing their best vintage for thirty years on either side of it. For what that would cost him, he might as well have gone all in and gotten the Schwarzhofberger like Marian had jokingly - he hoped - suggested. Marian took a sip and gave a hum of contentment at the taste. “And internationally?” she asked. “Again, more your specialty than mine.” A thick coating of ambrosia covered his tongue at his first sip, and he let it linger before he put his glass down to continue speaking. “For what it’s worth I’d guess a similar story. Had the powers that be wanted to decree we should have nothing in common with Ostria besides a language, they had their shot at it. No mutual defense treaties, no common governance, a common currency is theoretically a possibility, likely pushing it-,” “And stupid,” Marian interrupted. “Our economy is better.” “My point being, we go back to having a common market with Ostria, Mediterranean to Baltic. Whether that will do us much good on the economic front, I really can’t say, but it shouldn’t hurt. Our foreign rivals get to play generous granting a favor that isn’t actually theirs to grant. Our citizens see a world no longer so unreasonable or inhospitable. Everybody wins except those benefiting from everyone being angry with each other all the time.” “I know that,” Marian grumbled. “All of us in the business know that. The trouble is, if Christ himself came down off the cross to suggest we reach across the aisle and find common ground, the common ground we’d find would be nailing him back onto it. Posthaste.” Erich pushed the last half of his glass towards her. The agreeably balanced sweetness of Republican dessert wines didn’t compensate enough for their richness to allow him to enjoy more than two or three sips. And he was the one doing the bribing. “I expect you’ll find it fun to have the papers wondering what’s gotten into you,” he jested. Her mouth worked as she tried not to smile. “I’ll...I’ll talk to my editor,” she promised. “Thank you,” he said, giving a mock bow. “I owe you.” “You’ll owe me even more once we’ve exchanged gifts.” He shook his head. Most years she came up with a more thoughtful present than he did. Not this one. “Mine’s better.” “Well I’ve gotten you one of those new razors so you don’t risk accidentally killing yourself every time you shave. What life-saving measure do you have for me?” “None,” he said, distracted momentarily, a plate of plum dumplings piled high and dusted with sugar making him rethink his rejection of the dessert menu. “I’ve got things you aren’t capable of getting for yourself. Which are quite difficult to come by.” “Tell,” she demanded. “No.” “I assume you’ve had them sent up to my room while I was down here, so I’m just going to call my maid and ask her.” He gave a guilty smile. “I forgot them at home. Come by tomorrow.” “Better idea,” she said, putting out her cigarette. “I’ll come by now, we’ll open another bottle of wine, and we’ll pass judgment on what everyone we know in common is up to these days, with no chance anyone overhears.” He glanced over his shoulder. “You can’t come home with me,” he whispered, leaning towards her so he didn’t shout. “You have plenty of extra rooms.” “People know you stay here. No one’s going to assume we’re sharing a cab because we live the same direction.” “Well,” she drawled, “I expect I’ll find it exciting to have the papers wondering what’s gotten into me. I could do much better than you.” “Mari!” “Anyway, I really should give my poor maid the room to herself for Christmas. Frida will make excellent use of it, I’m sure. She does have to put up with me all year. I mean, can you imagine?” “No,” he laughed. He spun around to hand off his ticket for the coat check, and then turned back to her. “Whatever you’re paying her, it isn’t enough.” “Then it’s settled. I’ll call her and tell her to pack me a bag. We’ll meet in,” she looked at her watch, “fifteen minutes. And since you care so much you can go hold a cab now, and I’ll get in it far enough apart no one will remember.” A light patter of rain began its beat on the roof of their car while they were going through the roundabout in the Tiergarten. Marian assured him her furs would survive the short walk from the street to his front door without an umbrella, so long as another bottle of wine was waiting for her on the other side. “You’re free to take your pick of the cellar,” he told her. “I’m still catching up on sleep, so once you’ve seen your gifts it’s bed for me.” “A nightcap, then,” she replied. “You’re a whisky man, no?” “One drink,” he emphasized, going to retrieve both decanter and gifts. The first one she unwrapped was the summer sausage he had made in Waldstätte . From there they were side-tracked to go to the kitchen for a knife so she might indulge in a midnight snack, during which time she relived his first successful hunt, as he’d known she would. “This isn’t…” she exclaimed, seeing a part of her main gift. “Where did you get these? How did you get these?” Two picture frames slid from the package she was holding, a bird’s eye view of each grand estate she’d spent her childhood between. “Over the course of the war we ended up with more surveillance footage than we knew what to do with,” he explained. “Especially of the zones around our borders. I had to go looking for something and recognized the horse farm over in Trakenen and got to thinking.” “It must have taken you days to find these. Weeks.” “It took someone days,” he agreed. Tracking down specific photographs as they all waited to hear what would become of them during the great demobilization had been Ernst’s chief assignment after the canal episode. Marian tipped back her head to give a bark of laughter. “You’re as bad as I am. Is it legal for me to have these?” “Debatable. I haven’t gotten in trouble over mine.” They went into the main corridor so he could show her. All around, his birthplace made for a significantly less imposing photograph than hers did. “Oh,” she groaned, taking a piece of art off the wall, one from a series of watercolors set around the old estate. “Oh no.” “What?” “Dear, nobody likes men this sentimental. Your mother painted these, and I did love her very much too, but…” “No, no,” he corrected. The ostentatious works that used to grace the hallway had been too much. Bare walls were too little, something modern wouldn’t look right, there had been no reason to spend money when he had perfectly adequate artwork in storage, and thematically, it all went together. He hadn’t hung them to get nostalgic over laying on the sofa in the drawing room while he’d watched the paint strokes form recognizable landscapes. “If that’s what you want to tell yourself,” Marian shrugged. “I don’t really care. All I’ll say for your sake is I hope you aren’t telling any women you bring home these are from dear old Mummy. You’ll make their hearts ache. And that’s it.” “I’m not a complete idiot.” He snatched the painting back and stuck it up on the wall where it belonged. Then played with it until it was straight. “I’m headed off to bed. The back room’s the quietest. Extra blankets are in the closet.” He next saw Marian close to twelve hours later, reaching desperately for the coffee pot and then a slice of bread. “Unlike most women I’ve been glad to grow old,” she said, when she took a seat at the table with him. “Except this part. I used to wake up with no reminders of how much I’d drunk the night before.” “Can you imagine what we’ll be like in twenty years?” he asked, folding his newspaper and putting it down now that he had company. She shook her head, winced, and took a bite from the ham he’d sliced for himself. “Do you know what you need?” she said. Her head turned around while she inspected the kitchen in the light of day, despite the misery he could see the movement caused. “You need a woman’s eye around here. Or a man who has an eye for design. We must be modern about these things. Just get a wife already. Or the equivalent.” “I could say the same for you,” he snorted. “Or, well, you know what I mean.” “You know, your brother asked me once if that’s why I wasn’t married.” “And how did that go for him?” “Ask the next time the two of you talk.” She motioned for his water. “Anyhow, I say this because I wandered around a bit once you went to sleep. And either you chose to decorate this way yourself or you think what that aunt of yours did with the place is still in style. In both cases you’re wrong, and you need someone who cares enough to tell you.” “You’re doing a fine job of it,” he retorted. It had been the widowed wife of his father’s cousin who’d looked after him during cadet school that had done the last updates. He didn’t correct Marian. “Look here,” she said, standing up to walk over to the tiling behind the countertop. She glanced back to see that he followed. “Nobody has checkered patterns anymore. This should be white.” “Hey,” he objected, when she pushed open the door to his bedroom with no hesitation a half hour later. “What if there were things in here I didn’t want you seeing?” “Like that you have two beds pushed together?” she laughed, pointing at the offending object. “Live a little. Buy a big one.” “It’s more practical this way.” He took a moment to jerk his comforter up in demonstration. “As long as it’s just me, it’s much easier to make up only the one half.” “Yes, and I expect you switch sides every so often so the mattresses age evenly.” “Is there something wrong with that?” “Sometimes you’re so boring it loops all the way around to making you interesting. Tell me, is it stamps you collect, or coins?” She reached up to give his cheek two pats. This time he allowed it. “Don’t pout. That was a compliment. And if you got a housekeeper you wouldn’t need to make the bed.” “I’m one person who’s rarely here. A weekly cleaning is more than enough.” “But they cook for you so you don’t have to see the food when it’s ingredients,” she frowned. “It’s far less appetizing in that form.” “I like cooking,” he reminded her. No matter the dish, from elaborate pastries down to simple soups made from dumping expiring pantry items together, cooking required concentration. So you didn’t slice a finger off, so the oven didn’t catch fire, so you didn’t put in the wrong amount of salt, the monotony of chopping and stirring and tasting wrested control from all competing mental functions and reduced all thought to whether the chunks were the same size or whether the onions were brown. Twice a week, more if he was lucky, he lost himself to the rhythm of making his food and cleaning up afterwards. “You need new hobbies,” Marian sniffed. “I’ve been thinking about getting a dog.” “Terrible idea.” “Why?” “Because you like me more than your brother. You are so clearly a cat person.” She gave a nod that spoke of finality on that subject. “And anyway, I meant hobbies that included other people.” “Marian, for the thousandth time, I like being on my own,” he groaned, pushing her out of his room. “I’m perfectly happy with it. And you’re one to talk.” Halfway out the door she paused to shake her head without turning around. “You’re happy with it because it’s easier for you. What makes us happy and what makes us satisfied are so very often different.” She pulled her robe tighter around her thin frame. “I should have been very happy to be married. To have children, especially. Only I know I’d never be satisfied with all that came along with it. I couldn’t do my job if I had to tow a household along behind me each place I went.” His hand went to her shoulder, and then behind her back as she turned to face him and lay her head against his chest. “Some days I regret it too,” he told her gently. “Shut up,” she whined. “You still have twenty years not to.” Her knee jerked upwards in annoyance, an apparent attempt to make him as unlikely to have children as she was, and he pushed her back reflexively, then sprinted down the stairs towards his office, where he kept the key in the door. Marian was too persistent to let him get away easily. At the bottom he grabbed for the newel and spun himself around to make a run for it down the hall, perfectly in time for the pillow Marian hurled with all the force her arms had to collide with his face and knock him off balance. From where he lay on the floor, looking up at her leaning over the top bannister, fuzzy at this distance without his glasses, he could see her melancholy mood was broken. “I’m going to get dressed,” she called, leaving him to contemplate cleaning up the kitchen for so long it felt like he’d gone and done it. After Marian left, he wandered into the sitting room, laid down on the couch for a nap, and lazed in a way he hadn’t for years. The rain that had started as a drizzle turned into a heavy downpour. It didn’t stop all weekend, nor did the fire he tended to keep the chill out. Dark-green stripes of wallpaper and heavy oxblood curtains he kept closed so he couldn’t tell the time - Marian suggested converting to light blue offset by gray - became the extent of his world for three days. Occasional scouting missions were made to the lands of fanciful-blue-wallpaper-overwhelming-a-small-space and gray-cinderblock-he-should-really- finish-off to use the bathroom and check the lower level for leaks. He subsisted almost entirely off bread, meat, and cheese he’d brought into the room with him. There was a drafty section by one window that served for refrigeration. Sunday evening, just before bed, he made his holiday call to his brother. The children occupied the phone first. Anneliese and Gunter were old enough to hold something of a conversation with - it was mostly about their Christmas gifts - and Friedrich, encouraged by his mother, made incomplete thoughts into the phone, clearly unsure of what strange man was on the other end or why he had to talk to him. Margarete said a few words next, dropping several hints that her husband’s New Year’s resolution had been decided for him. Erich’s best guess was that age and a robust diet had caught up with Otto, which was why his wife commented she’d like him to begin taking more after Erich’s example. More often than not it was feeling faint that reminded him that he’d forgotten to eat. Many Marks into their transatlantic chat, the person he’d called for joined. “Speak in Albish with me,” Otto commanded. “Why?” Erich replied, in his own language. “You need practice.” “I don’t.” “It will be fun.” What Otto really meant was it would be fun for him, because he suspected he was the superior of the two now. If that’s what he wanted to believe, it was Christmas. Erich was feeling generous. He heard about the weather in New Yourke, the indecency of American business hours, and how much his brother’s wife overspent on presents for the children before he learned that sleeping on the couch the past few nights hadn’t been a unique condition. “What did you do? Disappoint yourself?” Otto asked. “I didn’t feel like climbing the stairs. You?” “Don’t have children,” Otto sighed. “You will regret it, because they are the worst. You think they’ll be fine because they're yours and it’s a lie and they will turn on you when you least expect it.” “Mmhmm,” Erich said, wiping the corner of the mirror in front of him with his sleeve. “We’re all stuck together in this small house,” Otto complained. “I can’t get a break.” “Your house isn’t small.” “Don’t be pedantic. Relative to what I was used to, we’re all living on top of each other. Friedrich only learns words from me I don’t want him to. Gunter carries chocolate around in his pockets and wipes his grubby little hands on everything. Anne…” A deep breath in and heavy breath out come down the line. “I’m gifting Anne to the Foreign Office,” Otto ranted on. “They can take her around to different countries, let her loose, and she’ll turn up all manner of things to use for blackmail.” “What did she find?” “A picture book that isn’t for children,” Otto groaned. “Why did she have to go ask Margarete about it? What did I ever do to her?” “Well-,” “This would never have happened if I hadn’t left. The buildings here are too new. There’s nowhere to hide your things.” “It’s a good thing I didn’t call when Marian was here,” Erich said. He patted at his hair where he noticed it sticking up. No amount of combing fixed it. “I doubt you’d like her opinion. And she would love to give it to you, I’m sure.” “What did you two do for Christmas?” “Talked too much. Drank too much. She stayed the night,” he answered. “Ate too much too. She finished that entire roll of that sausage I had made after I went to sleep.” Otto laughed. Too hard. “I always knew one day the two of you would get drunk and you’d give her a piece of your-,” “Otto,” Erich cut in. “This is why you’re sleeping on the couch. Grow up.” “Oh come on. You walked right into it.” He knew he should’ve known better. Otto never missed a chance to comment on Erich’s relationships with women, as long as they were women it would make him slightly nauseous to think about that way. That was what his brother considered fair game. “You know, I used to think she fancied you,” he sighed. He and Otto weren’t alike enough to fight about much. Their mother had liked Otto better, their father Erich, and neither had ever been jealous of the other over it. Should Marian ever tell which of the two she considered the better friend, however, his days of being on speaking terms with his sibling would be over. “Me too,” Otto laughed. “Until I realized she felt cheated I could do things she wasn’t allowed to and wanted to prove she deserved as much as I did. At first I think she became friends to make herself feel good about being better than me at everything.” “She told me you asked her if she liked women better than you too.” “Don’t repeat that mistake,” Otto cautioned. “She went into exquisite detail about-,” “You’re looking for explicit.” “Exquisite detail about what she liked about men. It was most informative. Her vocabulary is impressive.” “If the details were exquisite you must have been tempted to see for yourself.” “You know what I meant.” “You meant explicit.” “Stop showing off,” Otto said, slipping into Germanian. “When are you coming to visit?” “...Someday…” Erich promised. “When are you coming home?” “We’ll make a trip in a year or two. I want Friedrich to be old enough to remember.” “Well, in the meantime, I hope Anne doesn’t get into any more trouble,” Erich bade goodbye. “Don’t worry, I’m sure she will,” Otto said. Erich could hear a drink being poured in the background, and then the line went dead. Glad I don’t have to worry about that, he thought to himself. He looked around at the room, pillows on the floor, blankets crumpled everywhere, and dishes stacked in one corner. And I’ll worry about this tomorrow. 
 January 19, 1931St. James’ Park, Londinium
 His name wasn’t important, but he went by Mr. John for anyone asking that didn’t know him as someone else. It was easier to remember a small lie than a big one. John was his first name. Most popular name in the country, that. Good luck trying to find him. His parents, Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith, a postal worker and a homemaker, had raised him and his three siblings, Mary, William, and Elizabeth, in a home up in Halloway where absolutely nothing of note had occurred, so he never had much to say about himself and was eager to listen. He was back in the home country, hopefully not for long. Maybe if the climate were better here, he’d have followed his father into the postal business. The damned drizzle had mucked up his boots nice and good in the five minutes he’d been outside. He tramped his muddy shoes along the muddy path, and whether he was making it dirtier or it was the other way around he couldn’t say. Though he was sorry when he stepped violently into a puddle to let it know his opinion of it and splashed the poor old lady passing by. He found who he was looking for over by West Island, exactly the opposite side of where he’d told the other man to meet. Horace Armstrong was a mid-level diplomat whose family’s money had pushed his career along as far as it was going to go, and his waistline further. Shame it couldn’t do anything about the hair. Mr. John - Upton Snodsbury for the purposes of this meeting, as Horace was a firm believer in the outlandishness of Albish names having a great deal of relation to their bearer’s importance - had befriended the befuddled buffoon over the course of three dinners in Dublen. John made it a policy to be outdoors as infrequently as possible in Dublen. On account of the weather, you know. Horace had proved to be a steady source of information on American foreign policy, if not one with access to anything of utmost secrecy. Incapable of forming his own opinion as he was, he gave an accurate reading on the collective spirit of American society. Mr. John rather liked Horace. “C’mon, Horace, c’mon,” he said as he approached, motioning for the other man to walk alongside him. “The cigarette’s not going to light, so you can stop trying.” “What’s this about, Upton?” “Oh nothing, nothing. Just in the city for a day and thought I’d call my old friend Horace. How’s work?” Work was fine, work was good, Mr. John’s contact in the U.S. passport office was going to be retiring so he’d have to see about getting a new one, and Horace continued to confuse solicitors with barristers. “Do you think they’ll do it?” Horace asked. They’d gotten onto the subject of a recent bombshell to rock Berun - not of the type the François would like - after a thorough review of how much money Horace had lost on each of his sports wagers. “Get their economy pasted back together or their countries?” “Either.” “I’m sure a man such as yourself has much more to say about that than I do,” Mr. John replied. Upton Snodsbury, Albion’s cheese magnate, wouldn’t presume to know more than Horace Armstrong on anything besides cows. Except maybe sheep. The Americans would take a fully reunified Empire over the other current contender for Europaen unification under the Communist International, which had its fingers in all Albish territories, and its entire arm in the Republic, both halves of the old Empire, and anywhere the Adriatic Sea touched. Upton Snodsbury agreed, as any sane Albish man of middle-class or better would. Mr. John wasn’t so sure himself. But then, he’d been born a working-class boy. The Communists could sod off to whatever alternate reality they came from and take the Empire with them. Maddening, the both of them were. The Imperials treated international “laws” like - well, actual laws. It was all about the spirit when it came to cross-country politicking. Who the hell cared about your little loophole, there was no skipping jail on technicalities here, so whether you wanted to firebomb civilians legally or transfer war materials somewhere illegally, the important bit was whether it was anyone’s interest to agree with you. The Empire had been well-behaved recently, because they’d gotten more rules to follow and people who liked following rules got happy about following rules, including bad ones. It was plain to see that the statutory limit on the Imperial standing army was going to cause all of Europa a problem whenever dear old Secretary Josef decided it would be faster to impose communism than elect it. That was fine, because the Commonwealth had been pleased to agree, mostly, to whatever the François and Rus wanted on the military front so long as they didn’t pulverize the economy of the entire continent - talk about people who couldn’t understand the concept of a Pyrrhic victory - and entrusted the all-important job of compliance up to Commonwealth chaps. Or, that should have been fine. The prime minister of the Commonwealth had put his signature down on a document saying they were all agreed that the Imperial Army had to be a quarter of the size it should be and a tenth of the size it used to be. The ambassador representing him couldn’t very well say over dinner that the Commonwealth government didn’t stand by the treaties it signed and they’d done it because they’d been outnumbered and needed to shut everyone else up and only planned on enforcing it to the extent they wanted to. Sure, sure, if the Empire went back to a million-man force there was no hiding it from anyone, but so long as no one got carried away a little extra here and there wasn’t an issue between friends. Not-enemies. Anymore. For now. Mr. John - as Oliver Green, that time - had gone along with one of the inspectors to an Imperial factory back a year ago. For God’s sake they couldn’t have made it more apparent they weren’t keen on noticing anything. Nobody could have not noticed them not noticing. And Mr. John, a professional at noticing while pretending not to notice, had noticed there was not a scrap of extra metal nor unexplained numbers of unrusted machinery. Damned Germanians. He was positive his personal version of hell was going to be an endless loop of them dragging the Commonwealth into wars by missing painfully obvious hints. It had to be something in the water. That, or they took a class in school that they passed by failing to pick up on anything the instructor wanted them to. If they weren’t going to be good for holding a line in the east, what were they good for? Happily, he now knew they had at least one citizen who was neither inordinately obsessed with following the perceived new rule that they were to have nothing in common with Ostria, nor the old rule that they were to have everything in common. When he next voted in their elections - that would be under the name Helmut Jedermann - he was going to put down this Marian broad for chancellor. “What do you think the François will have to say about it?” Horace wondered aloud. In response, Mr. John muttered some choice words about where those bastards could send their complaints, which startled his poor companion. Upton Snodsbury was a congenial man. “It’s the cheese business, you see,” he coughed. “If it weren’t for the François, I’d be the first name in the industry the world over.” “Oh,” Horace nodded. “Right. You’ve never sent me any samples, now that I think about it.” “My assistant,” Mr. John nodded, pulling his face into a grimace. “She’s very forgetful.” “Oh, I can understand how that is,” Horace laughed. “No offense taken. My girl wouldn’t remember her own name if you didn’t tell it to her every so often.” “I know,” Mr. John smiled. “I know.” xXx Silvio was a man with a problem. Several problems. A man of more problems than he’d had before. The reason: the world didn’t have enough problems. The Americans weren’t doing anything besides making money and attracting down-on-their-luck Ildoans to emigrate, when they could stay home and vote for Silvio. The Commonwealth hadn’t established any more colonies that he could claim rightly belonged to Ildoa because the Emperor of Ruma had once thought about conquering it two thousand years ago in a dream. The Republic was making overtures about a sort of Mediterranean alliance, which he could work with if he could find a way to paint it as an attempt at a new Ruman Empire ruled from Parisee, but it was too early for that. And anyway, merging his country into a Republican empire could be a good retirement plan. He shouldn’t close any doors prematurely. The Germanians continued to be as boring as their food. The Ostrians wouldn’t budge on Slovania. He was running on a platform of taking it by force, so budging would present somewhat of an issue for him. He had voters. Plenty of them. The papers said he had more than he did, since all company managers liked to flatter the owner. He was popular with some nationalists, some soldiers, some people who were easily convinced by pretty words, every one of his employees, and his mother’s friends. They weren’t enough to put him in the big chair, and now, everybody knew his name. His fall from grace would be that much worse. If he was going to campaign off of voters getting angry and wanting change, then excuse him for saying so, but he required some things that needed changing. Manufacturing them could only go so far. Until he was in the big chair, of course. Silvio took the week old pile of newspapers from his desk to thumb through as he waited for his morning coffee. He was over the fit he’d been in since the new year had started, and ready to diligently pretend to apply himself to his work while he thought out how he could take his money to the grave after he faked his own death. “Get that Neapolitan bastard in here,” he called to an aide, reading a headline in the third paper. Had he said something rude about Germanian food? He loved Germanian food. Anyone could tell you that. In fact, there would have been a story in tomorrow’s morning edition about it, except it would make things awkward. The left was currently in power in the Empire. Someone prominent on the left had stood up to say they wanted to chastely hold hands with Ostria. And you knew what they were getting up to in private if they were doing that in public. Spreading rumors about who was in bed with whom was as amusing as it was profitable. Silvio made sure to do it yearly at a minimum to maintain his mental health. His favorite ones were the ones he made up about himself. The Imperial heart was altogether too shy for his liking when it came to matters of love. He wholeheartedly gave his blessing to their relationship with Ostria, but they’d had their heart broken so recently that it could cause a case of cold feet. The trick with timid girls was to get their friends to encourage them. Articles had to run from Ansterdam to Zeelande declaring wide-spread approbation for some hanky-panky between their economies. Then Silvio could take his pick of problems to yell about. Would it diminish Ildoa’s power in the Mediterranean? By a small percentage that would seem larger if he talked more about it. Would it make it impossible to reclaim Slovania? That was impossible for Ildoa anyway, so why fuss about the causes. Was it because of a secret international order aligning itself against Ildoa? A truly surprising number of people were waiting for him to confirm their unfounded belief. Bigger lies were easier to swallow than small ones. There were days Silvio was disappointed in the man he’d become. He hadn’t acquired any foreign news outlets yet. And at this age. Still, he was resourceful when he needed to be. He’d paid plenty of people in his own country to have the opinions he wanted. Other people understood the concept of money; ergo, he could pay people in other countries to write into their own newspapers with the opinions he wanted. “Do-omenico,” he sang, when he heard the limp caused by his friend’s gouty leg. “I have an idea.” Once all this was over, he could even turn his network of opinionators on demand into a tidy little business. How lucky the world was to have an entrepreneur like him that recognized its unfulfilled needs. Because after all, Silvio was just a humble man solving a problem, buying the feathers on his wings one lira at a time. 




 

 School teacher, let me get my frames






 
 "You will always be fond of me. I represent to you all the sins you never had the courage to commit."
 
 January 30, 1931General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 There were exactly 1,643 doors in the General Staff Office of the Imperial Germanian Army. Behind many of them lay nothing more than empty rooms. Part of this was by design – the architects, awash in the funds that had in those days flowed freely towards any expenditure the Army desired, had planned for every possible contingency – that the size of the staff would grow, that multiple foreign delegations would be received simultaneously, that a state banquet would be put on there instead of in one of the palaces – anything that had popped into the imagination had been added. Improbably, they'd been prescient enough to foresee that the cooks who ran the now infamous dining room would occasionally serve the sort of food at lunch that would have each person in there running for the bathroom a few minutes later, necessitating an overabundance of stalls. There was even a room that every generation of officers prayed they never had to use. Built into the foundations, reinforced by layers of steel and concrete, the door to that room was impenetrable to anything besides heavy and sustained explosive force. Most of the empty rooms, though, had been abandoned by their previous occupants. Behind those doors lay nothing more than dust and the unfinished paperwork of former officers. Some industrious adjutant had gone through and removed all the essential documents; the time and effort needed to organize and file the rest away was too onerous for the already overburdened men and women who remained. To pass under those thresholds was to step back in time, hopeful missives and plans never put to use littering the desks, as though the war could still be won. There were doors that led to nothing more than closets or balconies, ones winding through the endless archives housed on the basement level, rooms that had multiple sets of doors for show. Some doors creaked, others groaned, a few had a tendency to get stuck in their frames on humid days. Most operated silent as a whisper, their loudest noise the thunk of heavy wood accompanied by a clack of metal as they latched shut. Regardless, to the people passing through them they were one and the same. Too commonplace to warrant a thought in the busy minds rushing about, any flourishes the woodworkers had added went unremarked upon. Of all those 1,643 doors, General Erwin Romel hated the set that led into his own office the most. How did he know there were 1,641 other doors that he didn't hate? Because his predecessor had obsessed pedantically over every last detail, and somewhere in the sheaves of notes Zettour had left for him that fact had been noted, like it was in any way necessary for the Army's Chief of Staff to be aware of that piece of information. His doors weren’t unpleasant to look at. In all likelihood, they were one of the finest sets in the whole building, well-made and meant to impress, with intricate details carved into the panels. Whoever was responsible for such trivialities as polishing the wood and oiling the hinges did their job so well that Romel had not a clue who it was. He'd never had to call them to complain. No matter how beautiful they were, it wasn't nearly enough to offset a simple and fundamental failing – General Romel's doors did not perform the function for which doors were invented, namely, keeping people who he didn't want in the same room with him out. Worse than useless at their essential purpose, Romel had eventually grown to despise them, and the shadow they cast as they were opening. The number of people who wielded enough influence to drop in on the country's highest-ranked military officer against his will without scheduling a time and date well in advance could be counted on one hand. In the back of his mind, Romel was aware that his doors themselves couldn’t be blamed for admitting the other parties to the meetings penciled in on the agenda his adjutant handed him each morning. The doors gave him a useful place to direct his resentment, concentrating it on an inanimate object instead of letting it poison the atmosphere with his guest. Or at least not poisoning it overmuch. He wouldn't want to give the wrong people the impression they were truly welcome to impose on him. The basic nature of the problem was that General Romel could just barely tolerate a good number of the people who walked through those doors, excepting his junior officers. They were the highlight of his days. He’d had his arguments with them, shouted at them, occasionally given them permission to shout back. But they were military men, through and through, just like he was. They didn't complain about things they couldn't change, they didn't snivel or whine, and most importantly, they understood the limitations that Romel faced and didn't ask him to perform miracles. A member of the political class coming to intrude was when he was glad he wasn’t a mage. He would’ve burned a hole through the wood of his doors glaring at them. Although, that might not be a bad thing. It would get his feelings across very succinctly. If a single one of those people was in the job to actually benefit the general populace and not just hear themselves talk, Romel hadn’t met him. Schleichel’s main purpose in life was supposed to be acting as political intermediary for him, yet some government functionaries were insistent on talking to Romel himself. He didn’t get it. It was an insult to the very hard work he put in to make sure he wasn’t pleasant to chat with. When it wasn’t a politician, it was the owner of a major military supplier coming to tell him how much his company planned on raising prices next year. Or one of those goddamned Albish showing up every so often to review things and drop rude comments about the Army being small to each other right in front of him. And just who the hell was to blame for that? One of these days he was going to challenge them to a real measuring contest. Worst of all was when it was one of the penny-pinchers responsible for keeping track of the nation's expenditures coming to harass him, like it was his fault that things cost money. If Romel had wanted to be endlessly nagged at by multiple people for no reason, he would have found a way to marry more than one wife. Then he could still go to work and be left in peace. By virtue of his position, he couldn’t be summoned to attend someone else at their say so. Inevitably, it was almost always people walking into his office through the hated set of doors and not the other way around. That Romel didn't mind so much. Being the Chief of Staff didn't come without a few certain perks. If he couldn't avoid meeting with politicians and their ilk, the least he could do was to force them into his own territory. Out of a deeply ingrained belief in maintaining every possible tactical advantage, anyone who wanted to meet with him that wasn't the President or the Chancellor of their government had to come to him. This guaranteed several things, foremost among them that he could get rid of an unwanted interloper the second Romel felt they'd overstayed their frosty welcome. It was like these people thought he had all the time in the world to listen to them cry over how difficult their jobs were, or more specifically, how Romel himself was making their jobs more difficult. He didn't mind dispensing wisdom to his own men on personal matters, or working with them when they ran across difficulties. But anyone who came into his office to blab about how the whims of the voters were as inscrutable as their wishes were unfulfillable would hear only a single piece of wisdom: If it bothers you that much, find a different goddamned job. Maybe I should take my own advice, Romel sighed to himself, pressing the button under his desk that summoned his adjutant, who would rush in claiming a made-up emergency that demanded Romel's immediate and undivided attention. He wouldn't mind giving his position up if he could trust that the person he handed it off to wouldn't make a colossal mess out of things and force him to return to fix it all over again. His current visitor had gone off-track and begun complaining that if Romel couldn't lend him a few members of the Army to beef up police security at his next party event, the man was likely to never see his home or family again. Good riddance, Romel thought. The decision to deny the man's request had been in the hands of a much lower ranked officer. He'd have to commend the responsible individual. Promptly, his adjutant knocked and dear Herr Dietrich was escorted away. Luckily, Romel had never had to use his last resort – the gun he kept in his top drawer. His job was a form of state-imposed punishment in and of itself, so imprisonment couldn’t make things much worse. His wife wouldn’t be there. Probably wouldn’t visit. Politicians definitely wouldn’t, and he could stick it to the Treasury by continuing to cost them money. In fact, his only visitor was likely to be the man bringing his food. It would be better than the dining room’s. Or his wife’s when she was angry at him. That was if it even got to that point. There were a few choice members of the political field Romel was entirely convinced he could shoot without bringing any lasting consequences on himself. So long as he didn't kill them, the minute they opened their mouths and made a statement the judge would throw out the case on the grounds that Romel had only been exercising every man's God-given right to defend his own sanity. When little boys dreamt of leading armies, without exception they saw themselves marching at the head of it, a future Alexander in the making. No one daydreamed about sitting behind a desk signing papers from dawn til dusk. Romel's only calluses these days were from his favorite pen. Technically, he'd been handed a nice promotion when Zettour had recommended him to fill the role of Chief of Staff. It was hard to see being removed from training fields and locked up in an office as anything but a personal form of hell. Last week he’d gone to church to repent for all the times he'd called his superior officers incompetent and claimed he could do their jobs better. In most cases he could, but that was besides the point. All he'd been asking for was the freedom to make war as he saw fit, not to be handed an unending list of responsibilities. Romel pulled at the collar of his uniform. As if the paperwork wasn’t enough, the building’s heating system conspired to put him to sleep, blasting warm air at him during the one season he shouldn’t be sweating. He had another appointment in a minute, or else he would have undone a few buttons, propriety be damned. In the interim, he picked up the next item in his tray, read the cover page, and put it aside with a grunt of displeasure. He could look forward to another Friday afternoon being ruined by puzzling over the mechanical jargon their scientists used to confuse everyone and make themselves sound important. If he never saw another report on testing procedure specifications in his life, he'd have seen too many. Thankfully, his next visitor was one he always looked forward to entertaining. He called his adjutant back in to have him prepare a cup of fresh coffee for her, and a few minutes later, at 4:15 and not a second more, in walked Tanya Degurechaff. There was no real reason beyond personal admiration that Romel needed to meet with her. His schedule was packed without adding extraneous demands on his time. The proper order of things would be to allow anything she had to say to come up through Lehrgen. Romel liked the younger man well enough. He was a reliable officer, perhaps one of the best in the General Staff. But if there was one thing you couldn't count on him for, it was objectivity where Degurechaff was concerned. That did seem to be changing. Not fast enough. Schleichel had come by after Christmas to say he was going to meet with Lehrgen and Degurechaff over that paper she’d written to disguise a method for a full-scale reserve training scheme. Apparently, Lehrgen hadn’t objected. It was nice to think the two were finally growing on each other. Potentially, constant exposure to Degurechaff’s magnetic enthusiasm had poisoned Lehrgen’s brain. It was hard to tell. In light of the possibility, Romel had been clear with Schleichel not to get carried away at Degurechaff’s word and do anything too obvious. The other man would gladly build him an army ten times the size it was supposed to be if that’s what Schleichel thought he wanted. Romel didn’t want to go to jail quite that badly. There were days he’d admit he was tempted to do more than cobble together a halfway decent border defense. After some leftist had gone to whisper in the Republic’s ear that Zettour had his sights set too high, the Army had gotten better about disguising its efforts to re-arm, and Zettour had gotten better at eliminating inconvenient tattletales. Every member of the Reichstag that wasn’t trying to lead them into the stateless brotherhood of international Communism understood that without a functioning army they’d soon find themselves without a state to govern, so they all conspired with each other - holding their noses if necessary - for the sake of job security. Hence, Romel’s opinion that applying a consistent ideology as a public servant was of significantly less interest to his parliamentarians than applying whichever ideology served them personally. Regardless of all that, Romel liked to hear opinions directly from Degurechaff’s mouth, including the ones he planned on shelving for his successor’s successor. The day Lehrgen had hired her was too indelibly etched into his mind to let him entertain thoughts that the other man could look past his prejudice. It wasn't every day such an exemplary officer came to him to confess they may have just made a huge mistake. "General Romel?" his adjutant had phoned in, near on a year ago now. "Brigadier General von Lehrgen for you, he says it's important. He's waiting outside." In all of Romel's life, he'd never seen a man who looked more in need of a drink than Lehrgen had at that precise moment. Wordlessly, Romel had reached for the cut-crystal decanter on his desk and poured them each a glass of brandy. The other man had sat there for a minute, staring at the amber liquid in contemplation, before tipping his head back and downing it in one go. "That bad?" Romel had asked. "Have you ever wondered if you've just made the worst decision of your life?" "A few times." "Degurechaff came by today." "Oh?" "She was looking for work. She starts on Monday," Lehrgen had confessed. Romel had given a dry laugh. That Lehrgen couldn't decide whether he hated her more than he feared her or if it was the other way around had of course been well-known to him. "You worked with her just fine that year she was your subordinate officer. I always respected you for putting your personal issues aside to figure out how to deal with her the right way," Romel had placated. "And she's not so bad as you think she is." "I barely saw her back then. You saw more of her than I did, you can't have been blind to-," "Oh she's got some ghastly parts to her, don't think I didn't see them. But she's good at what she does, maybe the very best. She'll never let you down. She never disobeyed a direct order. And if she likes someone, she's not unwilling to trade favors. Somewhere in there she knows how to be a friend. Or at least act like one," Romel had countered, pouring each of them another drink. "Plus, if she's doing what she likes, she's rather fun to be around." "I told her we'd pay her well," Lehrgen had said, after a long pause. "I don't think she'd have accepted otherwise." "There's money for that somewhere. She's worth a dozen or more officers, if I have to fire one or two to pay her I don't mind. Why'd you care enough to win her over?" "She's started looking for jobs. It's only luck I caught her so early, before she got to any politicians. Half of them would take her to show off if nothing more. And once she was in, soon enough they'd realize she's capable of a lot more. The general public wouldn't stand a chance against her." "So what," Romel had said, leaning back into his chair and cracking a wry smile. "Keep your friends close but your enemies closer?" "Something like that," Lehrgen had muttered, finishing his second drink. "Well, I'll be glad to have her back around, at the very least," Romel had chuckled. "It was too bad Zettour had too many eyes on him to keep her around from the start. I always did like working with her. And you might also, if you give her a fair chance." Lehrgen had tipped his head sideways and given a doubtful "mm" instead of contradicting him outright, and then had left, probably to go home and have another few drinks. Romel wasn't a bad man at heart, so in the year since he'd never dropped in on his Deputy Chief of Operations to say I told you so, though really, Lehrgen deserved it for doubting him. The other man still professed to being deeply suspicious of his assistant whenever Romel asked, but he wasn't so sure that was the truth any longer. He didn't think Lehrgen was lying to him. To himself, more like it. More than tolerating her, it was plain as day that he positively enjoyed having someone around who could argue competently with him. Not that Romel would say that out loud. He didn’t want to insult the man. Romel's head rose to assess the woman approaching his desk, his ruminations coming to an end as Degurechaff herself entered. "General Romel," she greeted, seating herself across from him. "How've you been, Degurechaff?" "Fine, sir, thanks for asking. And yourself?" Romel caught himself on the precipice of giving the same perfunctory response that she had, but caught himself before making it. If there was one person who'd commiserate with him, it was her. Impossible as it sounded, she had the more restless spirit of the two. He'd liked the challenges of being in the field and out-maneuvering his enemies on the fly; she'd enjoyed the same, plus the fight itself. Given that he was chafing at the bit to do something more active than stare at memos and sit in meetings, Degurechaff must have been positively beside herself with longing for their days on the Southern Continent. It would do her good to have someone to admit that to. Someone who wasn’t on the management team of the country’s largest arms supplier. Once Degurechaff was officially a soldier again, they’d have to have a little lesson about what one was allowed to put down in writing and send through the regular post. Openly pining for a return to war - or, excuse him, the “good times” to a military supplier - was a bit like heading out in your underwear thinking they counted as clothes. After the company’s owner had called to give a thank you, he and Romel had shared a good laugh over the youthful enthusiasm. In any case, she’d be smart enough to know that she couldn’t tell Lehrgen that what she really wanted was to be back at it with her Kampfgruppe. He’d take it as an imminent threat. And might not be wrong. Actually, does she know that her boss used to spend his days going back and forth over whether she was insane or just evil? Romel wondered. How couldn’t she know? She knew everything else, including, on occasion, the future. But who would ever tell her? was the next question that came to mind. There wasn't exactly a nice way to mention it. Nobody pissed off shoot-the-messenger types for fun. The way she used to smile in satisfaction when Lehrgen was around - still did, sometimes - made Romel think she knew. Romel grinned like that when he was kicking his opponent’s ass too. Well, Zettour talked to her often enough, and he wasn't one to mince words. He probably said something, Romel concluded. And if not, too bad. No point in spilling the secret. Those two could fight about it after Romel retired. Best of luck to his successor. Anyway, Degurechaff couldn’t have mentioned to Lehrgen that she was growing tired of making plans but not doing anything with them, since Lehrgen hadn’t come by to have another drink and grumble about how impossible she was. She’d probably love an ear to complain into over being stuck with office work for the rest of eternity. "I'm not doing the job I'd like to be, I'll tell you that," he sighed. "...is that so, sir?" "I sit in this godforsaken office all day making decisions about other people's work instead of doing any myself. The thing they don't tell you about being important is that all of a sudden, you're too damned important to risk doing anything real or reckless, so everything fun gets confiscated. You should be careful or you'll end up like me. There's such a thing as being too good at your job." "I'm not so sure about that, sir," she said, with a bemused smile. "But I can understand the feeling of having to work hard at something you didn’t choose so that it pays off in the future." Ahh, I was right, Romel thought, giving the girl across from him an understanding smile. You'd have to be nearly out of your mind to think that Tanya Degurechaff would be content to never see action again. Romel envied her. At her age, there was plenty of opportunity to see her plans come to fruition. Less so for him. The best he could do would be to hand the Army off to his successor in better shape than he inherited it. "Ahh well. Easy for you to say. You've got your whole career ahead of you. This is probably it for me." Degurechaff humored him with an understanding smile back. See, she does know how to be friendly when she wants to, Romel thought, nodding to himself. He was rarely wrong in the way he read people, and she was a fairly straightforward case. "You might come to be thankful to have the opportunity to lead the Army into a better future,” she reassured. Bureaucracy be damned, if she was in my seat, she'd never let anyone hold her back from marching at the head of the column, Romel chuckled to himself. He'd like to see that better future just as much as she, where the Imperial Army was once again as good as invincible, and they had a streak of winning engagements for the nation to take pride in. Though I do hope she isn't planning anything of that nature. Or at least not too soon, Romel thought. He didn't have quite the need to cover himself in glory that Degurechaff did. Lehrgen wasn't hallucinating when he saw certain unappetizing bits to her personality. If rumor could be believed, she'd predicted the last war turning into a continent-wide fiasco. If Lehrgen's worst nightmares could be believed, she'd done her part in making that a reality. "You aren't getting too bored yet, are you?" he asked. She considered a moment before giving her answer. "For now, I have no complaints." That was music to Romel's ears. He wouldn’t want her mind wandering off its course of improving the way the Army was run. He wasn't going to moralize about the reasons behind it. If she was doing it because she wanted to be back out on the battlefield in as little time as possible, so long as she didn't have the power to declare war, it didn't matter. And anyway, in a certain sort of way, Romel could sympathize with her. So long as the right limits were in place, what she ultimately wanted was a non-issue, and the best anyone could do was to use her prodigious talents appropriately. Few enough knew how to do that, Zettour and Rudersdorf, himself, Lehrgen had eventually learned. Though Lehrgen went and got himself all turned around worrying about why she did things, which Romel had no plans on dabbling in. So far as he could tell, it hadn't changed anything, and caused nothing but stress. “Good,” Romel nodded. “And you come to me when it’s time to think about your career more seriously. Lehrgen’ll give you a pretty little office with a desk, but he’s not going to set you on a path to outrank him.” Ahh, she knows, Romel concluded, watching the nasty grin creep its way across Degurechaff’s face. “I wouldn’t expect him to.” Feeling the urge to pull at his collar again to let in some fresh air, Romel got up and switched on the small fan that he kept near his desk. Aside from a few pens and a family photo, it was the only thing in the office that was really his. His adjutant had lent it to someone this summer while he was out, and Romel had jealously guarded it ever since. Having to sit in his office was bad enough. Having to sit in a hot and stuffy office? There were days he thought the pleasant breeze the fan created was the only thing keeping him from snapping and setting the damned building on fire. At least that was guaranteed to relieve him of his job, and no one would beg him to come back. "So," he said, sitting back down, "no complaints about your job, but how about mine?" "Sir?" "Anything you'd do differently, if you were me?" Her gaze lifted to the ceiling as her fist came up and pressed against her chin, her mind searching through its vast catalog of information as she pondered his question. "If I may make one suggestion...?" "I asked for it, didn't I?" Romel asked, with a gruff laugh. "You were a proponent of objective-based thinking when it came to the field. Giving your men a goal but letting them decide on how to achieve it." "And you always went beyond my expectations," he commented. She flashed a quick grin at the compliment. "The same could be done here. Top-down thinking is still the norm." "How do you mean?" "Well, broad strategy should, of course, be left up to you and the rest of high command," she explained, "but there's no reason you or the other high-ranking officers need to be involved in the specifics. Don't tell people exactly what you want, tell them what you need the finished product to be and let them decide how to do it." Romel leaned forward with avid interest. Somehow, this sounded like it was going to result in less paperwork, so regardless of the other merits of the idea, he was on board. "For example, if you were talking about a tank that you want designed, instead of getting down to the level of saying that you want the plating to be a hundred millimeters thick, and a certain grade of steel, and so on, you just say you expect it to withstand fire to whatever your desired degree is, and let the manufacturers figure out how to make that work. For all we know there's better ways of making the armor that no one's explored because they're too caught up meeting the specifications we give them." "I like it," he said, drumming his hands on the desk in excitement. "Same with projects you need worked on," she continued. "So long as you trust that the person you're handing it off to can get it done, all you need is to tell them what problems they need to solve, not what the solution needs to be. Push some of that down to the lower-ranking officers. The best results come from giving people the freedom to make their own choices, at least within the bounds you set for them. They'll work harder on an idea if it feels like it's theirs." Letting other people take initiative sounded like other people making decisions, which sounded like other people getting their jobs done without as much paperwork, which sounded like Romel reading and signing less paperwork, which sounded like Romel getting to leave the office to actually see his battalions and regiments and divisions in person. How was it that the army famed for its utilitarian efficiency was the one that got the single person capable of improving on it? God had a strange sense of humor. "You're much too wise, Degurechaff, you know that?" Romel chuckled, twirling his pen as he spoke. "Sometimes I do wonder if you're sixteen or sixty." She gave a breath of laughter and looked away. "There's days I'm not sure myself," she joked. "Though I am seventeen now, sir." "That so? I suppose I should know. I really ought to have a countdown until the day you're eligible for service again." "...I hope you don’t think that’s necessary, sir?" "Just a joke, just a joke," he reassured her. He hadn't meant to imply that someone needed to keep track of her and make sure she volunteered, like she couldn't be expected to do it herself. Teenagers were so touchy about those sorts of things. Especially ones who were mature enough to think they were adults. "Well, at your age you have better things to do than listen to an old man complain," he told her. "Get yourself out of here at a reasonable hour, and if your boss says anything about it, tell him it's my fault." She smiled at that and ducked out. Romel wished he could do the same. xXx Leaving Romel’s office, Tanya fully intended to take his advice and leave. There was a last beer from Christmas in the icebox with her name on it. Romel was free to make her an offer she couldn’t refuse when the time came. Life in the Army would never make her terribly wealthy; on the other hand, that had never been her motivation. Worrying about layoffs or inflation would be a thing of the past. In all crises, the government found the money to pay itself first. Financial security was a bonus, but physical security had to come first. There was no reason not to entertain the idea of a permanent position on the General Staff, and every reason not to if she was going to be reassigned the instant life got interesting. Whatever the future of her career was, there was one thing it was not - a joke. All she wanted out of life was to get to a point where she wasn’t worried about what the rest of her life would bring. Was that so much to ask? Sympathizing with someone who had it made wasn’t easy. That said, she wasn’t going to tell her boss’s boss’s boss to stop whining about losing his chance to die on the battlefield. She’d sign on for any job that guaranteed her that. Women didn’t have to prove to anyone they could win fights. Better to be a living coward than a dead hero. Tanya paused as she was gathering her things to make a quick revision to her previous thought. She’d been fundamentally uninterested in making displays of physical superiority in her first life. Being turned into a woman had nothing to do with anything. Anyway, as a rational person, she wasn’t going to volunteer for something that involved bodily harm when she could be doing desk work instead. Out of courtesy, Tanya dropped by Lehrgen’s office to let him know she’d be heading out early. She knocked at his open door. “Unless you needed something, I was going to take off.” He looked up and gave an apologetic sigh. “Actually, something did come up. I went by to find you a few minutes ago.” "Apologies, sir. Romel called me in for one of our meetings." Lehrgen's eyes narrowed at that. "How often do you do that?" "Not often," Tanya protested, hoping he wasn't upset that she was skipping levels in the hierarchy. Office culture in Japan had taught her how rigid some people could be about proper protocol on that front. "It's nothing serious, I think he just wants to reminisce about old times with me." "I see." Tanya fought the desire to apologize again, since she'd done nothing wrong, though Lehrgen still had an air of displeasure. He'd told her when she started her job that she could arrange her time as she liked and didn't need to clear every meeting with him, so she hadn't explicitly informed him that she'd met with Romel a handful of times. The meetings were short and nothing serious tended to come of them. In fact, Romel mostly just asked if she had anything that was better said to him than Lehrgen. Tanya respected Romel for soliciting constructive criticism on his subordinates, but she had little in the way of that to give. "I don't let it interfere with my work," she offered, hoping that would ease his mind. "And it's hard to say no when the Chief of Staff summons you.” "I - of course. I knew you'd seen him a few times, you are old friends. Romel's always made it seem like it was a quick chat in the hall, I didn't realize it was more formal than that. Is there anything I should be aware of?" Ahh, I was right, Tanya thought, relaxing. Lehrgen had simply been concerned that he would be out of the loop on a new project. All managers jealously guarded their best employees. It was natural that he'd worry she was working on something that would earn one of his colleagues accolades at his expense. She shook her head. "Just listened to a few complaints he has over his job," she said, with a small laugh. "I expect you've heard them." "Oh yes," Lehrgen said, giving a short laugh back. “What was it you needed?” Tanya asked. She stepped further into his office, and he gestured for her to take a seat on the other side of his desk. “I hate to spring this on you so suddenly,” Lehrgen said, opening a drawer in his desk to take some papers out. “But you remember back in September when you handed in some recommendations on reforming a few things? Rethinking the Army of the future, I think, was how you put it?” “Of course,” Tanya replied. “I’m a bit surprised, honestly, but it caught the eye of my boss,” Lehrgen said. “I was finally getting around to pushing along with a few of your suggestions that were immediately applicable.” “I’ll get to work on prepping for an overview next week,” Tanya promised. At long last, she’d found the opportunity she’d been looking for to introduce herself personally to the missing link in her chain of command. General von Schleichel had proven to be an elusive presence, occupied as he was by off-premises engagements. “No time,” Lehrgen sighed. “He’ll be here soon. At best I’d say fifteen minutes.” “Right,” she said, with an answering sigh. There weren’t many things she hated more than being put on the spot. “This is entirely my fault.” Lehrgen rubbed at his head. “Schleichel mentioned it over Christmas, I got distracted by the whole Ostria business, he didn’t follow up until today.” “I was thrown for a loop myself for a few days when that piece on Ostria came out,” Tanya admitted. “What a coincidence.” The newspaper had been somewhat of a mixed bag this year. She’d gotten a pleasant surprise seeing a prominent journalist take her position on Ostria, though it was too early to get her hopes up. What had been most gratifying was reading the byline. The countess von Tahnoff and Tanya would have plenty to disagree about on the wisdom of socialist welfare policies. On a personal level, she had nothing but respect for a woman who’d defeated her own Being X by looking at her assigned place in the world and then proceeding to make a name for herself running in the opposite direction. So long as they agreed to disagree on a couple points, the other woman was a friend Tanya wouldn’t mind making. As evidenced by Lehrgen’s change of heart on Ostria, Tanya was equally as effective at teaching adults to rethink their less logical viewpoints as she was at molding younger people into logical adults. The other recognizable name she’d seen thrown around recently gave her less reason to celebrate. The name Silvio Berluscone tickled at the back of her mind, like her memories were warning her about him. She couldn’t put her finger on why, but it didn’t have positive associations. No doubt some shady character from interwar Europe with a potential to cause disaster. Lehrgen had taken some time to come up with a response. He finally opened his mouth. “Marian-,” “Marian?” Tanya questioned, accidentally interrupting. “Sorry. I guess you’ve probably met her before. I’m jealous.” Lehrgen paused again and blinked a few times. “You do know what political parties she favors?” Tanya waved her hand at the issue. “I’m not saying we’d agree there. But she’s something of a role model. It isn’t often you see a woman doing exactly what she wants with her life the way she does.” Lehrgen’s eyes closed and his fist went to press against his lips. “Sir?” Tanya asked. “Just a bit of a stomach ache,” he grimaced. “The dining hall will do that to you,” she sympathized. “Well, back to your paper,” Lehrgen said, waving the folio of notes he had at her. “First item on my list was that you’d recommended something of a continuing education project. For former soldiers too. I don’t suppose there’s any personal interest there?” Tanya coughed awkwardly into a hand. Lehrgen had an uncanny ability for hitting the nail on the head. No self-respecting employee could confess openly to asking their workplace to train them for another job. She’d been planning on offering up her services as an auditor and slipping in some classes under the radar. “My officer training was accelerated, and the War College curriculum I went through was only what was applicable in the middle of a war,” she reminded him. “I doubt I was the only one. I’m sure our Army could benefit from giving all its soldiers the opportunity for a more well-rounded education, including ones it may need to call up again in the future.” “Whether we ever need them or not, I suppose it's the right thing to do. Convincing the government to find some money to offer the same to everyone we snatched out of secondary school those last two years,” Lehrgen reflected, as he made a few notes. “And I have a feeling I’ll be hearing it if we don’t make some spaces for women that would like to go on working now that their husbands are home.” “An excellent idea,” Tanya chimed in. As usual, Lehrgen’s moral rectitude dovetailed nicely with her own plans. “Schleichel would be the right person for drumming up donations for that sort of thing,” Lehrgen muttered, mostly to himself. “Maybe that’s what he’s interested in.” From there, they ran quickly down a list of changes, cross-training existing soldiers on through utilizing contract work for non-essential functions. They were interrupted by the third party to their meeting mid-discussion of an advisory panel. Tanya stood up to greet him, to her surprise earning a salute with a warm handshake following. Not a bad start. “Tanya Degurechaff,” General von Schleichel said, walking to stand behind Lehrgen’s desk instead of taking the seat next to her. “I’m glad we’ve found a reason to chat.” “I couldn’t agree more,” she said, tempering her smile on catching the defeated look on Lehrgen’s face. It was plain to see he wasn’t enjoying having his boss stand over his shoulder and control the room like it was his own office. “Romel gave me an idea of the main thrust of your paper,” Schleichel nodded. “Though it was hard to gather what the point was at first glance. I didn’t quite see how the rest tied in, so here I am.” Tanya winced. She knew she’d gotten too fanciful in finding ways to privatize their country’s favorite budgetary black hole. It would be another fifty years until anyone understood the principles behind it. Not wanting her first real impression to be of a girl who couldn’t focus on what was important, she dove in on the same topic she and Lehrgen had ended on. Summoning as much detail as she could off the top of her head, she walked through the benefits and practical considerations of allowing industry pioneers a consulting role as a voluntary board of directors of sorts. “It’s smart,” Schleichel agreed. “Better than trying to keep up with everyone individually.” She noticed Lehrgen blink a few times, pick up his pen, then pause just as he was putting it to paper. His eyes tracking behind him made her aware it was a scribble he didn’t want other eyes on. While she and Lehrgen had a good rapport, he had yet to clue her in on the power struggle playing out in front of her. In this case, it was safe to bet they were being territorial over whose political connections were whose. That wasn’t a part of her future she was looking forward to, no matter where her career took her. Tanya did both of them a favor and went along to the next point. Cross-training their soldiers would cut down substantially on the amount of time they spent phoning it in, and build capacity while they were at it. That wasn’t a hard sell. Luckily, she could skip the most difficult part of her pitch, substituting contract work for permanent soldiers at scale. Romel had done her the favor of explaining that in a way a man of his era would understand. The last major item on the agenda was the one she and Lehrgen had begun with, the one nearest and dearest to her heart. “Now there’s an idea,” Schleichel said, slapping his leg with a short laugh when she threw in Lehrgen’s suggestion they open up ongoing education to the former conscripts who’d missed the end of high school and career-minded women. “Adding the women will make sure no one gets the idea we’re going to teach the civilian boys anything we shouldn’t. I can find us a way to pay for that, don’t you worry.” Tanya smiled with relief at hearing how seriously the loftiest echelons of the Imperial Army were taking their promises. Corporate culture started from the top down. Meanwhile, poor Lehrgen was struggling to make it through to the end of the day, his lunch in the dining hall continuing to take a visible toll. He had all the hallmarks of a low-grade migraine. Rubbing his hand across his forehead, unnaturally controlled breathing, teeth biting at his bottom lip. No doubt exacerbated by a man with a field officer’s voice all but shouting next to his ear. “Well, we could run into trouble coordinating between all our different outposts,” Schleichel mused. “Can’t have everything happening here in Berun.” Embarrassingly, a small noise of contentment escaped Tanya’s throat. How long had it been since her project management skills got brushed off? For work this simple, the basics would be enough. Clearly communicated, realistic deadlines and deliverables, weekly check-ins as opposed to contact only when there was a problem, cross-functional teams to keep different parts of the organization in sync. “Theoretically, there’s no reason a phone call has to be limited between two endpoints,” Tanya threw out as she was concluding. “Given that magic exists, it shouldn’t be hard to figure out how to add other lines.” “Given that magic exists?” Lehrgen questioned, breaking his silence. “Yes…” she replied, unclear on what was so preposterous about that statement in this world. “Right,” he said, shaking his head. “Just never heard anyone put it that way.” “Well, I’d best be going,” their interloper excused himself. “Very enlightening.” With none of his usual efficiency, Lehrgen remained silent and unfocused, staring towards the window in the corner and absently worrying at a thumbnail. “Sir?” she ventured, experiencing a touch of déjà vu. “You aren’t reneging on our agreement, are you?” he asked, the battle between his stomach and his food exhausting him to the point his voice was little more than a whisper. “Agreement?” “To put what’s best for the country over what’s best for you,” he said, turning to face her and steepling his fingers. “At least for the duration of your informal position here?” Tanya gulped instinctively. Without a whisper of actual threat, Lehrgen was reminding her there was a very real downside to a life in the at-will employment market - one wrong move and you were fired. Clearly, he hadn’t accepted her alternative version of events surrounding her push for a job skills program. Forget magician, the man was practically a psychic. “I’m doing what’s best for our country the best way I know how,” she replied, with an utmost sincerity given to her by knowledge of the potential future. “I fully believe this will benefit the Army as a whole.” “I don’t disagree, necessarily,” he said, drumming his fingers against each other. “But keep in mind that this job puts a roof over both our heads. Yours more than mine. Taking things too far, too fast will destroy it from the inside out. Just think about that. Please.” Much as Tanya would like to object that she couldn’t be blamed for having the type of healthy self-interest that made the world go round, she could admit he had something of a point. It also gave her an inkling as to what had caused the tension between Lehrgen and Schleichel in the room. A classic schmoozer with little more than a decade until retirement stood to profit handsomely from greasing the wheels of her great privatization project. Lehrgen, with most of his career still ahead of him, could only see an ever-shrinking pie for himself to claim as he moved into the top spots. “Sorry,” she told him, after a steadying breath. “I got a bit carried away. I’ll keep it in mind, so please don’t-,” She cut herself off before she could embarrass herself further, the alternating hot-cold sensation on her face a sure sign she was now sporting unattractive splotches of red. Please don’t fire me was what people said to her, not what she said to other people. Lehrgen hadn’t given her so much as a hint he was rethinking the yearly raise he’d given her, let alone anything more drastic. She was merely unaccustomed to sitting on this side of disappointment and was letting it get to her head. “Please don’t throw the good out with the bad,” she continued, after giving herself time to compose a logical segue to the statement she’d left hanging. “It’s a bit out of my hands now, but I won’t,” he promised. “So long as we’re clear.” “Yes,” she affirmed, letting go of her breath. “Sir.” Lehrgen took a deep breath of his own and nodded to himself, regaining a touch of life in the process. “Then I’ll see you Monday,” he said, waving her out. There were few things Tanya enjoyed less than ending a workday on a bad note. Ending the work week on a bad note being one of them. “Before I go,” she said, clearing her throat. “I should let you know I talked with Serebryakov like you suggested. Everything’s cleared up now.” “Is that so?” he asked, straightening in his chair. She nodded. “Weiss will be visiting soon.” “You did a good thing, Degurechaff,” Lehrgen said, giving a ghost of a smile. “Have a good weekend.” It was amazing how easy it was to manipulate someone’s mood when their defenses were down. A well-timed hint that you’d followed their advice rarely failed. She could be sure a soldier had a soft spot for imagining himself the hero of this little drama. “You too,” Tanya smiled back. xXx Erich von Lehrgen flipped through the pages of notes in front of him a last time, searching for where precisely it was he’d been so lulled into complacency by academic tedium he’d forgotten who had authored the report. Tanya was smarter than him, and would continue to be. Had he not had that pounded into his head enough times over the years? He didn’t think she’d been using her plan to put the ancillary work of the Army into private hands as a convoluted cover for slipping a couple items in under his nose. She’d been too passionate about the rest, in the way only Tanya got passionate, alight with manic energy as eerie as it was enthralling. Nonetheless, she’d seen the opportunity to attach along with her well-intentioned suggestions ones that were rife with ulterior motives, which he’d overlooked because no matter how he tried it was impossible to immunize himself against her infectious spirit. He missed not worrying about world wars. He missed many aspects of his life before the term came into common parlance. None so keenly in that moment as the once-weekly walks home that separated the work week from the weekend. Somewhere around Frietenau, he thought, where he once upon a time got lost in the decorative Gründerzeit buildings and began envisioning what his life in a spacious one-man apartment would be like, indulging in the fantasy that moving out of the family home would make him into the type of person that drank colorful, suggestively-named cocktails with artists on Tuesday afternoons, Frietenau was where work used to say its goodbyes and hand the next sixty hours over to the rest of his life. With rays of an imperfect stability peeking out from the clouds of chaos and hopelessness that had blanketed the country, there was no reason he couldn’t take back something of the past. Once a week might not be possible for a while yet; once a month wouldn’t hurt anyone. The walk home was long, two hours if he didn’t stop, southwest down one road for such distance it changed names four times - Potsdammerstraße, Hauptstraße, Rheinstraße, Schloßstraße- until three hundred meters before the Botanical Gardens, where he turned south to cross the train tracks into his quarter of Berun, then turned again to continue southwest to the intersection with his street, which marked the commencement of a final, brief journey south to the next corner. It was the deepest part of the winter and dark. There was no time like the present. Lehrgen stepped out into Königsplatz and took the alleyway over towards the Reichstag and the main road. Yesterday’s rain still lived on in the thick mud of the Tiergarten’s shortcuts. Now, as it had been since he’d met Tanya, and as it probably would be until the world was rid of one of them, he found himself with no place to turn. She wasn’t wrong in fact, simply misguided in intent. Teaching their soldiers to do each other’s jobs was more necessary now than ever. Teaching what additional men - and women, thanks to him - they could under the fiction of promoting job skills would add badly-needed depth in the specialty areas that couldn’t be covered when you pushed emergency draftees through basic training. Near to melting into the traffic of Sommerstraße, he traded nods with a few Social Democrats filing out of the Reichstag. Party membership wasn’t much of an enigma with braids on the shoulders of his coat. An unsavory smile of adulation crossed with calculating eyes: a monarchist; the approving smile of a father proud of what his son had made of his life: the center-right; a respectful nod: one of the centrists; a brief duck of acknowledgement: the center-left; a sneer: a Communist. For the next five years, maybe ten, in the event of catastrophe the General Staff could count on veterans to form the backbone of a professional force, resurrected so that a parliament still existed for monarchists to shout at Communists. After that, Lehrgen had to hope the rest of the world saw the Empire’s meager army backed by aging reservists was no recipe for lasting peace. Otherwise, courtesy of Tanya he’d be faced with either signing rafts of illegal orders or resigning in protest, to be marked forevermore as someone whose communications were watched with special interest. Naively, he’d considered the possibility that Tanya independently wanted to round out her own education, prove herself more than a consummate soldier. Next mirror he passed, he’d have a laugh at himself. In Potsdammer Platz, where the endless stretch of what was officially Reichstraße 1 began, he paused to wait for two trams running opposite directions to pass by, along with a stream of cars and bicyclists. What was done was done. Schleichel was going to run with Tanya’s conniving plots, and unless Lehrgen fancied a short future ending with an unfortunate accident, he would keep silent and trust Romel’s word on what he wanted: nothing beyond an army that could hold its own reasonably well if and when a neighbor turned on them in the years between now and whenever the Imperial diplomatic corps got their treaty’s most onerous requirements lifted. Long enough to convince a third party to mediate before Berun was under siege and an unconditional surrender forced, so that yet another slice of the Empire could be lopped off as spoils to the victor, being what their leader pessimistically defined as “reasonably well”. On the verge of stepping from the curb, Lehrgen felt a tug at the sleeve of his coat. He looked down. The wide, trusting gaze of a child - three, four, five, he wasn’t good with their ages - stared back at him, a mop of light brown hair not unlike his own color nearly obscuring the young boy’s eyes. “H-hello,” he greeted. “Are you a police?” “Do you need a policeman?” He received a serious nod in return. “Are you lost?” “Mama said the police will find her.” By the entrance to the train station, Lehrgen could see Berun’s actual police officers standing around smoking cigarettes and joking with each other, one of the three watching the crowd at all times. In another minute, he would be on his way home once again and the city’s finest would have something productive to do. “I’ll take you-,” He stopped. In the more realistic imaginations of his younger self, his own son would have been about this age, and he was on the verge of dumping the fictional Christoph like a nuisance. “I’m going to talk to the other policemen,” he promised, bending down to lift the boy onto his shoulders. “And you’re going to look for your mother from up here.” “Okay,” came the reply, endearing for the uniquely calm way in which children accepted people picking them up at random. “What’s your name?” “Peter.” “Your surname?” “Bratfisch.” “Bratfisch?” Erich verified, standing still while he attempted to crane his neck and get another look at the boy’s face. “Is your father named Hugo?” “No,” Peter told him. Erich resumed his walk. A Hugo Bratfisch had delivered him a missive during a hailstorm on the Eastern Front so punishing it had killed a man wandering drunkenly outside without a helmet. The strange surname had stuck with him ever since. “His name is Papa,” Peter commented, after having some time to think on it. “A-ah,” Erich chuckled. “Where’s he?” “Mama says he can’t come back from R - Ru - umm - somewhere else.” “Russenland?” he guessed. “Mmhmm.” He patted Peter on the shin twice. “My father too.” The anonymous Bratfisch had, without a doubt, died in somewhat more glorious circumstances. Erich had received the call from his brother at work. Where else? He’d slept in the office half the time those days. Ernst had overheard enough to understand the nature of the news, had deduced some relation between it and the unrest in the east, and in his typically overly helpful manner had shooed all but the most important visitors away from Erich’s door. By the time the rumor circled back around for him to hear, rabid Communists had torn his parents limb from limb. The comparatively banal truth - that it had been a simple car accident resulting from a backup caused by none other than an Imperial roadblock aimed at containing anti-Imperial uprisings locally - hadn’t made its way around with quite the same speed. To this day, receiving condolences when Communist atrocities were brought up remained a common facet of his work life. “What happens when you die?” Peter asked. “You go to heaven,” Erich said, with false confidence, “and look down at all of us here. Our fathers are probably watching from the stars.” He heard the rustle of Peter’s coat as he moved. “There’s no stars.” Erich leaned his own head back. “They’re behind the clouds. And it’s hard to see them anyway, with the lights around us. But - umm - they can definitely see us.” “How do you know?” “Because I’m grown up,” he said to Peter. And one day you’ll learn that grownups tell lies to make children feel better, he said to himself. “When will I grow up?” “One day,” Erich sighed. When you learn to tell lies to make yourself feel better. All three policemen straightened up stiff as boards when he approached, and Erich bit his tongue so he wouldn’t laugh at them for esteeming a man struggling under the interrogation of a four-year-old. At his word, they were off in different directions to search out a woman in want of a child, leaving Erich and Peter to guard the station. His temporary ward was relatively content with flipping Erich’s hair back and forth for a few minutes, so he watched the whirlwind circus of traffic traveling through Berun’s busiest square, first searching for the face of an unknown woman, then taking up the equally impractical task of guessing which car leaving the city belonged to Marian. She was headed for Amburg tonight, blissfully unaware she was escaping the doom of Tanya recognizing her on the street. Learning of her status as the younger woman’s role model was possibly the only thing that could make Marian give up her career. The two of them didn’t belong on the same planet, let alone in the same city. Marian could stay here, where she was born. Tanya might be happier going back to whatever alien planet she hailed from where people prefaced sentences by stating obvious facts about the universe. “Hey - Peter - give those back,” Erich said, feeling his glasses lift off his nose. Peter began giggling, which probably meant he’d put them on. “How come you see like this?” “I need them to see normally.” “Why?” “The doctor says I overstressed the muscles that control our ability to see at a distance.” “Oh,” Peter said. “What’s that mean?” Erich sighed, his old habit of over-explaining one he’d tried and failed to fix for over a decade. Forgetting that he wasn’t a professor and that most students wanted to know the least amount of information required was the only time he was ever accused of talking too much. “My eyes don’t work,” he grumbled to Peter. “So can you give them back?” Not fifteen seconds after his glasses were in place, Peter gripped his hair with every ounce of force his hands could muster. It was a considerable amount. “There’s Mama!” he chirped. “Where?” Erich asked. One hand gave up its death-grip to point. After Erich glanced up to get a direction, he could see a portly brunette in the company of an officer walking their way. He lifted Peter off and into the waiting arms of his mother, who between heaving breaths confirmed she was Hugo’s widow, and Erich pressed a banknote into her hand, telling her to get her son a belated Christmas gift from his father. He didn’t wait around to hear her thanks when she unfolded it and saw the value. He didn’t really want it. The happy ending bumped his mood up a notch. All in all, the year wasn’t starting off so badly. Two steps forward and one back, repeated enough times, earned a substantial distance from the starting line. The patient instruction he’d given Tanya hadn’t fallen on deaf ears; the common decency to comfort Viktoriya and to feel shame - red-cheeked, stuttering, honest-to-goodness shame - at being called out for her short-sighted selfishness had grown from the depths of a soul he’d have once sworn was a black pit as boundless as the universe itself. His recalcitrant student was on her way to skating by with a passing grade in her remedial class on how to be human, and little Peter had a chance not to share his father’s fate. Walking through Schonenberg a half-hour later, busy boulevards fast giving way to criss-crossed residential lanes, Erich saw a street name he recognized, consulted his watch, and decided he’d gone far enough. He flipped a few coins into a beggar’s hand in return for directions to the nearest wineseller. The shop had a wider selection than he was expecting. Before he lost himself browsing the better bottles and tempted himself into buying something more worthy of a marriage proposal than what he was planning, he grabbed a Riesling he considered drinkable and set it on the counter. There was a man selling dahlias in the park outside the town hall, so he grabbed a bunch of those as well. Then he was climbing steps, hoping Elise’s shift at the hospital was over, or else he’d bought himself flowers he hated the color of - orange had been the only thing left - and wine he’d rather cook with than drink. When she opened the door she was still in her nurse’s uniform, unruly dark curls peeking out from under her cap. “You had to visit the one day I didn’t change into something better when I got home,” she lamented, with a self-conscious laugh. “Have you had dinner yet?” “No. No - umm - I was halfway through making something. But you’re welcome in. If you want. It’s only dumplings.” “I’ll help,” he said, stepping inside. “You don’t have to,” she said, first waving her arms, then trying to brush her hair into a neater arrangement, followed by her mail into a neater pile. He shrugged off his coat, searched in vain for somewhere to hang it in a kitchen approximately the size of a postage stamp, folded it and laid it over the back of a chair. “It would be my pleasure,” Erich smiled, rolling up his sleeves. A knife that was incongruously large for the counter space available to use it was pressed into his hand. Long ago, he’d learned that waving weapon-sized knives around a few times to watch them whoosh through the air earned a universal disapproving stare and you’ll-hurt-someone-with-that sigh from women. He’d expected to grow out of the desire to play at cutting the air long ago, too. Instead, he briefly tried to catch his reflection on the blade. No one would miss him at work tomorrow. And if they did - well, that was their problem. 
 February 14, 1931Invalidenfriedhof, Imperial Capital Berun
 The walk from Visha’s hospital to Berun’s military cemetery would have taken Tanya ten minutes under normal circumstances. Fifteen pushing a wheelchair. It had been a half hour, so far, because Weiss had decided to draw it out as long as possible, pausing every couple steps to describe to comment on what he was seeing, at least half of which was made up. They were on their way to pay their respects to their fallen comrades at the generic memorial the city had put up. Trying to visit the individual town memorials that had names carved into them was an inconvenient journey, and one Tanya assumed the dead had no hard feelings about her not undertaking. Barring a run-in with Being X, they were bumbling around as toddlers in another life, one hundred percent unaware of their last one. The crowds of central Berun on a Saturday had proven somewhat overwhelming for Visha to handle. She’d insisted on the excursion, though, so had simply closed her eyes for the duration of the walk. Tanya couldn’t tell if she was paying any attention to the false picture Weiss was painting for her. Each time Visha failed to react to an outrageous statement, he came up with a more unlikely scene to replace it. “And what do we have over there?” he asked with interest, walking a few steps on his toes to peer over some high bushes. “That couple looks like they’re having fun-,” Tanya elbowed him in the ribs to prevent colorful descriptions from following. Case in point. It was a frigid winter day, the ground was soggy, and they were on the outskirts of a cemetery. Who would believe anyone was desperate enough to...Never mind, Tanya muttered to herself. She was too short to see over the bushes, but walking past a bare spot revealed that love - if that’s what you wanted to call it - was conquering all practical considerations. Once they’d laid down their wreath of flowers in front of the memorial, adding to an already-impressive pile, they were done as far as Tanya was concerned. There was no point in sitting around talking to the dead. Take it from her, they couldn’t hear. “I guess you must come here often,” Weiss said to her. She considered lying. On the surface, it was the easiest option; however, if Weiss had additional questions - which famous graves had the best headstones, where to find the tomb of some hero Tanya was supposed to have visited - the lie would quickly come unraveled. She shook her head. “I didn’t want to come alone.” The statement itself wasn’t untruthful. Other people were better at coming up with the expected platitudes of praise and comfort. She’d been dutiful in honoring the dead in Japan, but she’d never figured out what was supposed to be more meaningful about memories called up by force in front of a grave as compared to ones that came up naturally as you went about your business. Anything further seemed more for the benefit of the living. “It’s a strange day for visiting a cemetery,” Weiss sighed, after sending a look of pity Tanya’s way. “I don’t think it’s inappropriate,” she shrugged. Their little party was by no means the only visitors, though she imagined brotherly love wasn’t what most women there had come to celebrate. “How are things with Lina?” Visha asked Weiss. “I wouldn’t want to make anyone here jealous with the details,” he winked. Visha turned to Tanya to share her annoyed face. “You’d better wait until I can come to have the wedding.” “Long as she doesn’t drag me to the altar first,” Weiss laughed, pulling at his collar. “Well, you’re stronger than she is, so I expect that won’t be difficult,” Visha sniffed. “True,” Weiss said, then bumped his fist down twice on top of Tanya’s head. “It’s this one who we need to watch out for. Doesn’t know how to cook, never cleaned up a fork in camp that wasn’t hers, so will probably have to buy her own ring, grab someone by the necktie, and-” It was Visha who hit Weiss this time. “Stop that,” she hissed, then turned to Tanya. “Don’t let him give you the wrong impression. Neither my father nor uncle got married so they could be mothered.” Tanya pushed Weiss’s hand away and gave a thanks to Visha for the unnecessary advice. In the doubtful event she decided to trade her autonomy for having someone around to hear her errant thoughts, she was certainly intelligent enough to be clear about the terms of the arrangement beforehand. As with many circumstances, her apparent youth allowed her an easy way out. “I’m not ready to think about that yet,” she coughed, looking away. Hopefully, that would put an end to Weiss’s inquiries in the letters he wrote. As far as Tanya could tell, he wanted to remain on friendly terms without being friends. She heard about a variety of incidental events in his life - what his coworkers did or a new restaurant he’d tried - and very little about who he was as a person. The one time she’d written to him to spell out her views on the post-war tax system, his response had amounted to “that’s interesting”. “You know what’s sad?” Weiss asked, turning back to inspect the obelisk commemorating the war. “Vooren died for a country that won’t be his in a few years.” There was a cruel irony to it. Lieutenant Grantz had been from the Lowlands. The area had borne the brunt of the Francois invasion, and now required a substantial rehabilitation effort, which Berun was contractually obligated to pay for, before they were viable as an independent country again. Unable to defend themselves should the Empire have decided to conquer them and wanting to reap the benefits of participating in Europa’s largest single market, the country had originally thrown in their lot peacefully to Imperial hegemony. Between the Empire’s struggles and the incentives the Commonwealth would no doubt offer for trading with them as an independent entity, the money was on the Lowlands leaving the union when their plebiscite came in six years’ time. Visha and Weiss spent a few minutes going over the highlights of their time with Grantz, and then Tanya’s turn came. “We worked very well together, I thought,” she said, bestowing her highest compliment as a concluding remark. “When I let myself think about after the war…” She cleared her throat. This was exactly what she hated about overindulging in the past. Before you knew it, you’d progressed to the pointless exercise of discussing what could have been. Grantz, an enthusiastic, quick student of Tanya’s and a tireless laborer, had been the rare example of someone she’d looked forward to keeping as a coworker, if possible. “What?” Weiss asked. She shook her head and looked away, embarrassed to have been caught getting so foolishly sentimental. “I thought we might’ve had a future together in civilian life too,” she sighed. Tanya felt Visha’s hand grab hers and squeeze it a few times. “Look,” she murmured. “You’ve gone and made Mr. Manly cry.” “Shut up,” Weiss snapped back. “It’s the wind.” Tanya supposed she wasn’t the only one who’d wanted to snatch up Grantz as a junior at work. There wasn’t any call for tears over it. Well, Weiss was closer to him than I was, she decided, a somewhat unpleasant thought popping into her head. It hadn’t yet occurred to her that her former coworkers might be going to her gravesite to get awkwardly emotional. If they wanted to honor her memory, all she asked was that they pretended she was still there, checking up on the quality of their work. Lost in thought, Tanya missed that Weiss was moving closer. The next thing she knew, she was hoisted fifteen centimeters off the ground, pressed into firm pectoral muscles by the strongest pair of arms to ever hold her. Tanya was well-accustomed to the rush of nervous adrenaline that accompanied being taken by surprise. Strangely, her initial reaction wasn’t the usual fight-or-flight response, but to relax and stay still, like prey playing dead. Perhaps because her unconscious didn’t see Weiss as a threat, she was left more disoriented than focused on escaping. Too off-balance to build a strengthening spell, she was then forced to squirm around uselessly in confusion until Weiss decided he was done comforting himself by squeezing the life out of her. Tanya coughed, caught her breath, cleared her throat a second time, straightened her coat, and regained her usual clear-headed state. The best thing to do would be to move along to reminiscing over a fallen soldier they’d known more casually before Round Two could commence. Anyway, it was rude to concentrate on a single person’s memory. “We should say a few words about Lieutenant Wustemann,” Tanya suggested. “Sure,” Visha chimed in, lightning fast. Perhaps she’d noted Tanya’s agony. “We can talk about someone else.” Tanya tensed when she felt a hand on her shoulder. Luckily, it did nothing more than pat down. “Of course we can,” Weiss added. Great, Tanya thought, relieved. After the shock had worn off, she was feeling rather drained. The atypical sense of calm left in its wake threatened to make the rest of the day frighteningly nonproductive. 




 

 Making Love Out of Nothing At All






 
 "I am not young enough to know everything."
 
 March 26, 1931General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 Cautiously, Erich von Lehrgen poked at the food in front of him, regretting the optimistic gusto with which he’d taken his first bite. The Sauerbraten had smelled good. And had come from the kitchen drowning in sauce, avoiding the usual plague of overcooked dryness. In his experience, it took no small amount of dedication to overcook Sauerbraten. At each touch his fork bounced back, every cut of meat it met with as leathery as its predecessor and more similar in nature to the boots he was wearing than the consistency of the same dish made by his own hand. In place of overcooking the meat, the dining hall had undercooked it, by three days or more, solving one problem by replacing it with another. The allegory was a fitting one for the meeting he was enduring. His travesty of a meal managed to be more preferable by virtue of giving everyone eating it the option to abstain, or, as he’d observed his peers doing, to fill up on the potato dumplings served alongside. Their only crime was in being a bit bland. Their guest was the sole person in the room visibly offended by what he’d been served. In spite of Romel’s protests to the contrary, the other man was more than adequate at playing politics when he wanted to. He could deliver a disrespectful slight so politely it was only the smug half-smile tugging at his lips that betrayed the deception. Ulrich Gassler, their Minister of Defense, was stroking the bushy mustache beneath his nose, casting his affronted gaze at the waitstaff from behind slightly crooked spectacles, all while trying to pretend he had the upper hand in the room. It was a valiant effort, though Lehrgen liked to believe he pulled off acting like he was in control of his own unfairly-advantaged subordinate somewhat more naturally. Out of boredom, Lehrgen poked at the Sauerbraten again. The additional fifteen minutes of marinating had done nothing to improve it, nor to improve his attitude to the plan Gassler was unsuccessfully attempting to pressure the rest of the room into agreeing to. Every other day, the François changed their minds on whether they were angry enough to overthrow their government. Every other week, they went back and forth on whether they wanted it replaced with communism or Napoleon dug up from his grave. In either case, the fact remained that the Republic was limping along in a similar fashion to Lehrgen’s own country. It would be a decade or more until they presented a serious threat to anyone. Gassler, who was spotting at the sweaty patches of forehead exposed by his receding hairline with his napkin, was more intimidating. Regardless, Republican politicians from both ends of the spectrum were fond of making bombastic statements they couldn’t back up to the press. Imperial newspapers printed them, therefore Imperial citizens read them, therefore Imperial voters worried about them, therefore Imperial politicians worried about appealing to all the voters who were worried about the François invading, with an army that they technically had, but would run out of the ability to supply within a matter of months. After several years of punctiliously correct behavior, Imperial diplomats were convinced they could coax an amendment to the treaty out of the Unified States and the Commonwealth, and by default, their debtor nation, the Republic. The proscription against new border fortifications could be relaxed, and the Empire could quite literally wall itself off from the Republic with the construction of a nigh-impenetrable line along the western edge of their country. It was a nice fantasy. If it didn’t involve eating away at an already-constrained budget and expending political capital they could put to better use. If the troop limit was lifted in tandem to a size that would allow them to man their expensive fortifications without abandoning their other borders. If, miraculously, facing the François was the most menacing thing their future held, not the hulking, silent behemoth to the east. Lehrgen pushed his plate away, made eye contact with an understanding waiter, then glanced pointedly at the wine carafe he’d refused earlier. Half of the country wouldn’t spare a moment out of their day to think about an external threat from the Federation. A communist revolution from the inside out, maybe. Not an invasion. After the war, the Soviets had turned inwards. Foreign press was allowed in sparingly. There were no splashy news features. Yet slowly and quietly, they were evolving. The failure of their farm modernization, which they nevertheless insisted on pursuing with enthusiasm, was matched by the success of their industrial modernization. For now, there was still a notable gap between the Federation and the leading nations of Europa; in another generation, it would close. There were benefits to not having to concern yourself with immiserating your populace in the process. A sip of wine rolled over Lehrgen’s tongue. The Spätburgunder was shallow, light as plain water and as immemorable, its taste evaporating as soon as he swallowed it. But for a few seconds, it rid his mouth of the noxious reminders of his almost-lunch. If anyone, it was the Federation they needed to wall themselves off from, which just so happened to be a country with no incentive to relax their stance on border fortifications. A substantial amount of that border was technically the division between Imperial and Polaskan territories, a division which the other half of the Empire - the ones who made it their business to have obsessively hateful thoughts about the Federation on principle - didn’t want to acknowledge existed, as though the Polaskans had merely taken a vacation. They would never vote for a physical separation between two rightful Imperial provinces. Romel gave a startlingly loud belch. Didn’t excuse himself when Gassler paused his passionate speech about how much it would ease their citizen’s minds to see the François dealt with once and for all. While Gassler gathered his thoughts back together, Romel stood, announced they’d do a feasibility study, and dismissed the room. Gassler moved to pick up his papers and knocked them to the floor. Cheeks beginning to redden, he hastily collected the shreds of his dignity, thanked them stiffly, then shuffled out. At the far end of the room and working on the last of his wine, Lehrgen caught Romel stopping Schleichel to whisper a few words to him, which likely meant Gassler’s days in his job were numbered, and a more friendly minister would be suggested to replace him. “Not so fast,” Romel said, stopping Lehrgen next. “Two things.” “Yes, sir?” “Tell Degurechaff she’s writing up the feasibility study,” he said, motioning for Lehrgen to walk with him towards the back staircase. “Sir?” “Did you ever read any of her academic work?” Romel asked. “Not her field reports. She didn’t waste a single word in those. I’m talking about the thesis-type stuff.” “Of course,” Lehrgen nodded. “And what would you say was their distinguishing trait?” One foot on the first stair up to the next level, Lehrgen paused. “They’re complete,” he replied, resuming his climb after he found the right word. “She goes into every viewpoint thoroughly, supporting or opposing. You know, so many people’s arguments only make sense if you ignore half of what’s been said on the matter, or only look at the surface and pretend it isn’t more complex. At least on the subjects she chooses to analyze critically, she doesn’t hold back.” This time, it was Romel who paused. He gave Lehrgen a skeptical snort and a pat on the shoulder. “To each their own,” he chuckled, with a shake of his head. “I was going to say they’re uniquely able to take exciting topics and break them down into such minute detail you lose sight of the bigger picture and fall asleep after a few paragraphs.” “Well-,” Lehrgen quibbled. “Anyway,” Romel cut him off. “We’ll agree that they’re three times longer than what anyone else writes. At a minimum. There’s no reason it can’t take her past the next election cycle to finish the project when the product will be so extensively researched.” “I understand,” Lehrgen chuckled, pushing open the door to his floor of the building. Romel had another flight to climb. “And the second thing?” “You might be going on a trip sometime soon.” He turned around, door held open, to raise an eyebrow. “If we’re not going to build what Gassler’s asking, we should find something to calm everyone down a bit. There’s always minor technicalities we can agree on and pretend it means something. I’m sure Londinium would love to host the Everyone’s Getting Along Summit.” “But sir, I’m not-,” “You were an attaché in Londinium once upon a time,” Romel broke in gruffly. “The Army sends some sort of advisor to these events anyway. You’re important enough to lend a convincing gravitas for the photos to what’ll amount to a mutual understanding not to fart across each other’s borders.” In response, Romel earned a short bark of laughter out of him before Lehrgen let the door swing shut. Their Chief of Staff had a way with words that lightened even his most pessimistic pronouncements. Tanya’s office was on the way to his. The meeting with her he had scheduled to begin in half an hour could have an early start provided she was amenable. A sliver of light peeked out from a door shut nearly all the way, presumably to keep distractions from hallway passersby out, not latched to keep visitors out. He doubted it was an oversight. The door opened without a peep of rusty hinges. With her back to him, Tanya gave no sign to indicate she’d realized she wasn’t alone. She was standing, leaned back so that her right leg bore all her weight, left ankle crossed in front with only the toe of her clunky brown shoe touching the floor. As he watched, her head turned just enough to sweep her gaze to one edge of her desk. For a moment he could see her left thumbnail stuck absently between her teeth in profile, then she shifted to track her eyes along the papers laid out in front of her, mumbling under her breath all the while. In opening the door and catching Tanya in a private moment, he had unknowingly found her in a private dimension. His controlled, methodical, fastidious-to-the-point-of-machinery worker bee had been lost amidst the explosive chaos of documents littering her desk, like she had upended a filing cabinet over it. Both of her feet went flat to the ground as she bent forward to pick up a journal from beneath several loose pages. The black book with the cracked spine was immediately recognizable. He saw it twice a week. It was what she used for her meeting agendas. Whatever notes she made were hidden behind her left shoulder. He would be seeing them soon enough, written out in the marginally less legible and vastly more personal scrawl that had all but replaced the childish block lettering she’d used a year ago, back when she hadn’t yet written enough to develop handwriting that could truly be called hers. After she’d finished, she stacked a few items together and turned them face down. The entire process repeated - a minute of muttering to herself while she assessed the contents splayed out below her, another note, another file put in order and placed face down on top of the first. A third time, a fourth time, and by the fifth time he was determined he wouldn’t interrupt the workings of a mind carrying ten times the information and a hundred times the unique insights as the average. Nevertheless, in this moment, it appeared equally as faulty as the average, and as likely to lose its train of thought to the abyss as soon as its concentration shifted. Sixty years’ worth of stress groaned out of the floorboards when Lehrgen stepped further inwards to grab for the door handle, his boot apparently the first one to touch that precise spot since the building had opened. Tanya jumped in the air, rotating a quarter-turn in the process. One arm stretched out to grasp for an imaginary weapon. “Sorry,” he spluttered out, too aware of how long he’d spent trying to piece together where this glaring incongruity fit in with the rest of what he knew about Tanya. “I was going to close the door instead of interrupting. You seem like you have a lot on your mind.” At his nod towards her desk, she turned back to it, and promptly began pushing papers into a single pile. “Degurechaff,” he said, waving his hands to get her attention. “It’s fine. It’s your office. Leave it a mess if you like. As long as there’s no animals hidden in there.” “No, no, umm...” she protested, hands still frantically corralling her files into the appearance of order for a few seconds until they got too high and collapsed, which finally got her to give up. “I like keeping things neat. Trust me. You should see my apartment.” For a brief moment, she relaxed to laugh at herself. Once she turned to face him fully, her shoulders slumped and her eyes dropped to the floor. “I always wanted to be one of those people who could write an essay without planning out the structure in advance,” she sighed. One of her arms crossed over her stomach to hug the other. “But, well, now you know the truth. I have to look at it all together and go around in circles a few times.” There was a sad sort of irony to the confession that out of everything, this was the first time he’d heard Tanya say she would choose to change something about herself. “You could’ve had me fooled,” he offered, with a shrug. “But it isn’t the end of the world.” “I know,” she hummed out while she put a hand to the back of her neck and rolled her head along it. “Though if I don’t do it, it will be the end of me making a halfway decent impression with how I present my work at our meetings. So if you don’t mind…” She tossed her head towards her door, eyes wide and eyebrows raised in a nonverbal plea, not the brusque, pointed flick she gave as a way of communicating she was done wasting time talking. The half of him that blamed her for being a victim of her own intolerance turned him around to leave. The other half, the one that could identify with a less extreme version of the feeling that after succeeding too many times, no one gave you room to fail, stopped him before he went. At seventeen, he’d had the benefit of confessing every secret struggle to a girl who’d known they’d never marry. She’d cared about certain things. What he was going to make of his life hadn’t been one of them. Elya’s question from months ago, Does she ever turn off?, circled its way around his mind, chased by the memory of Tanya casually dismissing her own brilliant performance as a mage as nothing more than what came naturally to her a few weeks later. Pitiful was a strange word to associate with Tanya, fragile even stranger, and they were all he could come up with to describe his glimpse of a girl so accustomed to automatically impressing everyone that she forced herself to keep up with the pretense when she was out of her element, and so could not let herself turn off. The heady rush of power he’d expected to accompany discovering the key to bringing Tanya low didn’t come. He’d anticipated it would be from convincing enough people to agree with him. He’d hoped it would be because he found a way to make Tanya feel badly about the parts of her she should rightfully feel badly about. In no idle imagination had he explored the sickening possibility that he’d have to make her hate herself for being, in the end, all too human. He let out a heavy sigh, regret that he was going to toss away his advantage mixed with relief that he’d unearthed it at a time when Tanya hadn’t put him in a position where he was tempted to use it. “Degurechaff,” he said, with every ounce of seriousness he’d been trained to give orders with. “Yes, sir?” she asked, after waiting a few seconds to see if he’d continue. He’d needed the time to force his face into obedience, so he could turn to her and not have his exasperated attitude accidentally contradict his consoling words. “If you feel it helps you to do all this, then by all means, feel free,” he told her, waving at the additional preparatory workload she’d arbitrarily assigned herself. “But please don’t feel like you have to. Your work will make a good enough impression on me regardless.” She blinked at him. Twice. Opened her mouth to say something then closed it. Did another double blink, cocked her head to the side, opened her mouth again, let her breath out in a huff, furrowed her brow. “Sir, without sounding arrogant, I didn’t mean to imply I lacked confidence in the quality of my work,” Tanya replied. Her expression transformed into a quizzical one. “That aside, isn’t someone doing their best work always better than them doing it well enough?” His lips twitched. Nothing was more dangerous than Tanya doing what she perceived as her best. For all her intelligence, she was alarmingly eager to limit herself by narrow definitions. “Theoretically,” he said. “Get your coat and follow me to my office.” “My coat?” “We’re going outside to talk,” he nodded. “But then…” she said, looking back at her desk full of notes. “That’s the point,” he drawled. “Your coat and let’s go.” “Alright,” she agreed, taking a deep breath. She picked up the black book that contained her agenda. “Fine.” It took three long strides for him to reach her. He snatched her security blanket out of her hands, clicked it shut, and plunked it back on her desk, leaving his hand on top so she couldn’t get to it. At this distance, closer to standing over her than next to her, he could hear the shallow, angry breaths that accompanied ice blue eyes which had frozen him in fear more than once snapping up to meet his own. This time, he wasn’t intimidated, not at all. Next time, he probably would be. They worked together, which meant they by default operated on her terms, in a game nobody could beat her at, where all she had to do to win her chess board was to understand the role of each player, how they could move, how they couldn’t. She was too smart. With perfect clarity, she could predict how Brigadier General von Lehrgen would react to each of her plays and plan accordingly. This time, though, he had cheated. Erich was not bound by rules quite as strict. She held his gaze for three counts, turning it into a stalemate one of them would need to back down from. He leaned his face in a few centimeters to see if triggering her memories of drill sergeants singling out recruits in line would make instinct override her desire to win this exchange, and induce her to hop to the last instruction he’d given her. “Degurechaff?” Without a rude word passing her lips, she artfully communicated she had a number in mind by making him wait and watch her visibly swallow her annoyance so she could chime out a hollow “Yes, sir?” He shook his head, drew away, and turned back towards the hall. Not before he saw the flash of triumph on her face. He wished he could see the smirk falter when she realized he was walking to the hooks behind her door instead. “Your coat,” he announced pleasantly, angelic smile plastered on his face, giving the offending object a cheerful shake when he held it open for her to put on. She drew herself up to her full height, set her chin in the air, and resumed their staring contest while she glided her way over, finally breaking it to turn around so he could slide black wool up her arms. He didn’t make much effort to hide his satisfaction when glancing over her shoulder to place her right hand in the sleeve, they caught eyes again for a split second. His version of expressing it was less triumphant smirk than soft pull at the left edge of his mouth. All the same, it was there for her to see in the brief moment before she whipped her head around to look forward. Her retaliatory gesture, involuntary though it was, the tightly controlled temper translating into muscles that stiffened up when he stepped inwards just when he needed her to cooperate, could have botched the ending of his otherwise perfect coup. Would have, had his teenaged years in Berun not been spent under the care of a relative who refused to do a single thing for herself that she considered the duty of another person. Compared to Aunt Irma, who’d been nearly as tall as him and twice as wide, gracefully pulling the lapels over Tanya’s shoulders and placing them in front of someone acting in the functional capacity of a department store mannequin presented little challenge. For the duration of the walk to his office, a whole thirty seconds, Tanya stewed silently. Once they were heading down the main staircase and she was sure he wasn’t tricking her, the protest of unfair, unfair, unfair he’d seen lurking on her face made its way out. “Sir, if I’d known I’d need to recite the details from memory, I’d have - umm…” “First question,” he said, turning his head slightly to get a look at her. “Explain to me why it is you think I intend to give you a pop quiz.” “Because…” she hesitated. “Because if I rise up the ranks, I’ll be making decisions that are too big to ever put all the information out in front of me.” His eyes threatened to take up residence in the back of his skull. Perhaps Tanya had more hope as a woman than he gave her credit for. She’d managed to answer his question without answering it at all. “You’re right that it’s about getting a new perspective, but…” he drifted off, an absolutely euphoric sensation making it hard to maintain his composure so he could say his next three words with all the restful finality of Ja, ich will at an altar. “You’re wrong.” Eight seconds. Eight seconds of making Tanya squirm was all he asked for in return for the eight years she’d done it to him. He counted in his head, refusing to explain, refusing to even look at her. Two steps down their second staircase, descending from the building entrance to street level, the clock ran out. “Do you mind?” he asked, cigarette halfway out of its carton. Now that the gloating was over, his intention wasn’t to antagonize her. “Actually, do you want one?” “No,” she said quickly. “They’re relaxing,” he countered. “Make the world seem a little more right. And give you a bit of concentration. Not the worst companion for a pop quiz.” “I’m alright.” “Have you ever even tried one?” “A long time ago,” she dismissed. Despite being in the middle of an intersection, he reflexively grabbed for her arm and turned her towards him. “A long time ago?” he stressed. The timeline his brain was attempting to scrabble together didn’t add up. The span since the war had ended didn’t count for long enough, during the war mages had been under strict prohibition not to smoke, and before that she’d been all of eight years old. “I - agh -,” she groaned, tipping her head back. “Alright,” he agreed, touching her elbow to get her to walk with him again. He’d file this away under the same section of his mind that was ever-so-slightly concerned about how she’d picked up her taste for cheap Republican wine. “Not my business. Do you mind if I have one?” “Just go ahead,” she huffed. Because he savored it, they were around the next corner and onto the bridge where Wilhelmstraße spanned the Spree by the time he was done exhaling his first breath of smoke. Winter wind whipped up the river. Still, he stopped them again, halfway between the second and third street lamps. A triple layer of cloth protected his elbows when he touched them to the rough stone of the balustrade to watch the gray-green water drift by. Figuring it was the right thing to do, he made room for Tanya to huddle next to him in a way that shielded her from the worst of it. He wanted all of her concentration on what he was going to ask her next. “Second question,” he said, after another drag off his struggling cigarette. “And if you get this right, you pass with full marks, and all the rest of your answers can be wrong and I won’t care. So don’t disappoint me. Please.” She drew in her breath so seriously he almost broke character to collapse in laughter. “I’m ready.” “It’s Thursday,” he began. “We’ll meet again on Tuesday. We’ll probably see each other tomorrow and Monday, but let’s pretend we studiously avoid each other until Tuesday.” “Okay…” “Assuming, in the next hour, that you manage to get every single detail of what you want to tell me wrong, between today and correcting your mistakes on Tuesday, five days later, precisely how many people are going to die as a result?” The second and third finger on each of her hands went to rub at temples that framed closed eyes. “It’s not a trick question,” he assured her. “So no maybes. One word answers only.” Her eyes flicked open. Hurt and betrayed, they gave him a once over, as if to say she didn’t know who she was standing next to. She wasn’t strictly wrong. “Zero,” she spat out. As soon as she said it, she bit her lips together behind her teeth. It was so easy to read her thoughts, the fuck you that she wanted to scream for making her second-guess herself just to prove a point he could have made to her fifteen minutes ago. He forgave her the invective that he heard, though she didn’t say it. At her age, he’d been equally as annoyed by the implication that there was a difference between wisdom learned from someone else and learned for yourself. Or maybe all he was looking for was a reason to explain why he considered himself qualified to dispense advice to her. Either way, her fury didn’t offend him. If she wanted to be angry with someone, she could start by looking in the mirror. None of his other employees required such unorthodox methods to budge their opinions the tiniest bit. “Congratulations,” he said, throwing his arms out to the side in a mockingly grand gesture. “You’re a genius after all.” Quick as an adder striking, his cigarette was plucked out of his left hand while it passed her by. She took a hit off it, just the once, with all the indignant energy of a woman from Parisee who’d walked out of her apartment after realizing the artist she’d made famous had found a new and younger muse. “These are as awful as I remember,” she frowned, pushing the cigarette back to him. “How do people ever get addicted?” “We’ll get there, actually,” he promised, taking a step back towards the edge of the curb, mindful of the traffic behind him. He waited for her to take her place by his side before he strolled onwards. “Anyhow, perspective. Five years ago, wandering around for two hours without telling anyone where I was? On the wrong day, I might’ve put your body count to shame. Now, I bet Sauer won’t even miss me. I, for one, am glad of the opportunity to let other things be important to me.” He looked at her with what he believed to be an encouraging, hopeful smile. It was possible a hint of desperation that she please find something else, anything else, sufficiently important to her crept in. Her response was to blow some hair out of her eyes. “I know everything isn’t life or death anymore, sir,” she said. “That isn’t an excuse for substandard work.” “No, of course not,” he sighed, having a bit of a laugh at himself for his failure to get his intention across. “I guess this is what I get for not planning what I was going to say in advance like you would have.” Just as the shadow of a railway bridge eclipsed them and dropped the temperature a few degrees, a train lumbered by overhead. There was no talking over the screeching brakes, so he took the time to gather his thoughts. “There’s a difference between knowing something’s true and feeling it’s true,” he commented, when they stepped back into muted sunshine. “We meet twice a week. Interferences will happen. Two weeks ago it was for personal reasons, and you acted like there was a legitimate chance I was going to tell you you’d dealt with worse than spilled coffee on your pants in the trenches, so you couldn’t go home to change. Two months ago you rewrote an entire report after I told you I’d like some minor adjustments on similar reports in the future. You’ve worked both Christmases. This summer you mentioned to Sauer you looked tired because you apparently stayed up two nights in a row to meet a deadline instead of asking for an extension, or to put something else on the back burner, and I…” He took a deep breath. Mixed in with the sooty air and cigarette smoke was the smell of schnitzel frying. More than anything, he wanted to lead by example, yield to mostly harmless temptation and march into the restaurant they were passing for a plate, along with a healthy dose of their strongest liquor. “I take my work very seriously,” she agreed, staring at her feet and scuffing her shoes along the sidewalk. “How I perform now will dictate how I’m assessed for opportunities in the future. I’m sorry, sir, but I’m failing to see how that reflects poorly on me.” “Degurechaff,” he groaned, letting his right hand drop from rubbing his face to land on her shoulder. There were areas where he feared she was beyond hope. This didn’t have to be one of them. A thousand times, he’d accused her of being something less than human. It was hard not to, after all those years of perfect performance. No weaknesses, no flaws, no signs of so much as intellectually comprehending the conflict between innate compassion and following orders the rest of them faced. She’d left no room, for him or for anyone else, to drop their guard or show a chink in the armor that could be exploited. Not once had he accused himself of being something less than human sometimes, too. Small wonder she didn’t trust him to be capable of taking a few warts in stride. All she ever saw of him was the professional mask, not the person behind it. Erich used his guiding hand to turn her around and push her through coffered wood doors, then placed her at the bar before she could spot the section in the far corner adorned with the official portraits of each Kaiser and go beseech them to cleanse her mind of the impure thoughts one of their own ranking officers was intent on giving her. “Three shots of whiskey,” he called to the grandfatherly bartender. “Something half-decent.” Two decades spent giving orders, the latter portion of it ranked high enough to end budding careers, had made him used to unhesitant obedience. The bartender stalled a second. His eyes shot to Tanya, assessed her, accurately, as being several months below the legal age for liquor, and floated back with faint disapproval towards Lehrgen. A silent exchange - a shrug and eyeroll of I know, but do we need to make a big deal of it met by a disbelieving flick of eyebrow and objecting frown of Fine, since I can’t write you up for unbecoming conduct - passed between the two men. In this particular moment, Erich couldn’t summon the energy to care. Some walls needed a gentle shove to come down. Others required special equipment designed for digging underneath the foundations. It wasn’t a bartender’s place to judge his patrons for seeking out the latter. His place was only to provide it. Erich watched, perhaps too eagerly, as a bottle was selected and overturned. This was a situation he hadn’t been trained for. It wasn’t his job. In fact, intentionally revealing soft spots to potential enemies was the exact opposite of his job. In a grand cosmic joke, don’t worry, it’s okay, we all mess up sometimes, don’t beat yourself up over it, phrases deliberately excised from a soldier’s professional vocabulary, were what stood between a world where Tanya saw no choice but to return to doing what she was best at and a happier alternative. The glasses he received were less full than they could have been. That ended up being good for Tanya. Her battle to keep a straight face at the taste was one she lost, and badly. “Nothing I said before was meant as a criticism of you,” he sighed, after he’d downed his double serving and her coughing fit subsided. “Because it doesn’t reflect poorly on you. It reflects poorly on me.” For her next trick, Tanya’s face did a remarkable impression of a fish gasping for air. “Th-that’s not true,” she assured. “I know you didn’t ask me to do any of that.” He signalled the bartender for another round, one for each this time, Tanya’s underpoured yet again and his own splashed out lazily so it spilled over his hand. No apology was issued. He snatched Tanya’s before she took it. “You’re Germanian. Or Polaskan. Maybe Rus,” he said. “So is it safe to assume I won’t have to pick you up off the floor after this?” “I’m not a lightweight,” she muttered. Her second drink went down easier. Lehrgen paid and left to kill any possibility of seeing how their self-appointed member of Berun’s vice squad planned on responding to his request for a third. “On the subject of what we know versus what we feel is true, the fact that you knew I didn’t tell you to put in all that extra work but felt you needed to do it anyway is the problem,” he explained, thumb rubbing at the ridges of the house key in his pocket to keep him grounded while they strolled by the beginnings of Charité Hospital’s sprawling campus. “I’m realizing a year too late my part in it.” She said nothing, for once. Maybe out of fear another answer he disagreed with would have them tracking down something more exciting than alcohol from the hospital pharmacy. The idea wasn’t without its merit. There was something terrifying - deeply, viscerally, profoundly terrifying - about letting Tanya touch any part of his self that lay beyond the professional one. Without trying, she’d pillaged that so completely he’d had to reconstruct it after revising everything he thought he knew about what it should mean to be a soldier. There would be nowhere to retreat if she landed a similar attack behind the lines. “Most of the years you’ve known me I was giving my best to my work. Better than what my best is under normal circumstances. Because if I slipped by a hair, a report a minute late, the smallest detail misremembered, sometimes that really was the difference between life and death. Too many of us making too many mistakes, and our sovereignty as a nation was in jeopardy.” His next two steps turned him around to walk backwards, to face her person to person. “That’s all you know me as. For all I know, you couldn’t tell me my first name.” “Erich,” she replied promptly, stamping her Berun origins on the hard ending she gave it. “And what else?” he asked. He took his hands out of his pockets to cast them to the side. “What else do you really know about me?” By the way she rolled her head from one side to another and grunted out an “mm” he could tell she’d much prefer he hammered away at her on those details she’d been so concerned about getting wrong without her notes. “You’re from East Preussland. Noble but not titled. You have a brother. Your parents died at the end of the war. You were in Personnel before you joined the General Staff. Based on your rank you should be forty-five or fifty but I think you’re a decade or so ahead of schedule. You don’t like sweets. Or riding on airplanes.” He turned around to walk side by side with her again, satisfied by the honest effort she’d given the answer. She could’ve left that last part out. “If you looked up my records you’d see a similar story,” he nodded. “Born in East Preussland. Came to Berun on a permanent basis when I started cadet school. I have a late birthday, so I was one of the youngest in my class. Second Lieutenant when I graduated at seventeen, first lieutenant two years later after that business in Alsatia. Did well, got bumped up to Captain as soon as it was allowed, was sent to Londinium for a stint, came back for War College, graduated that a Major, and you were pretty much there for the rest.” At the next intersection, he took them through cast-iron gates. The grounds of the hospital stayed reasonably green through the winter months. It was a quieter walk, and a prettier one, especially with a few early buds coloring the tree branches. Tanya reached out to touch one. “I think cherry trees are blossoming by now,” she remarked. “You like cherry trees? She shrugged. “They were in bloom, once, when I was in Parisee. I didn’t realize I’d appreciate the sight so much. We don’t really have them here.” “Something, I presume, that didn’t make it into your official records,” he smiled. “Somehow, I don’t think Zettour was interested in hearing my suggestion we use our tunneling specialists to dig some up and take them home as spoils of war,” she laughed. “I guess I’ll have to go back to Parisee for them.” “Maybe not,” he said. “Next time my neighborhood association asks I could shock them by having something to contribute instead of ignoring their mail like usual.” She turned back to smile at the joke, which she didn’t realize was half-serious, because he couldn’t tell what her level of seriousness was for visiting Parisee as a tourist in comparison to doing it as part of a conquering army. A nod of his head towards the path along the river started them walking again. “Look,” he said. “It would be neither unreasonable nor untrue to deduce from my personnel fact sheet that I take my work - my career - very seriously, and that I expect the same from my coworkers. But it does leave some things out.” His eyes switched to observing the slow meander of the river’s current so he didn’t have to see the twitches of her face that betrayed her reaction, the annoyed boredom of can-we-get-this-over-with, to hearing information she considered irrelevant. “So,” he began. “I was born in East Preussland on a minor estate. I do have a brother. I briefly had a sister, but I was too young to remember any of it, so not particularly pertinent.” Guilt drew a painful line up his sternum. He could not, for the life of him, remember her name. It wasn’t a subject the family mentioned out loud. He could picture the grave perfectly, the neatly-tended headstone off to the side, spaces to be filled soon by his grandparents and later by his own parents separating it from the rest of the row, every detail with the exception of the words carved on it. “My brother is the older one,” he continued. “And what you might not know, because Preussland’s entailments laws weren’t likely a salient research topic for you, is that not only was it assumed he would control the estate after my father, but that legally, it was nearly impossible to arrange it any other way. You once expressed surprise that I didn’t live like I had an inheritance waiting for me. Up until we got a whole new government, I really didn’t. I was never going to be penniless, just prideless if I had to go begging for money all the time.” Often, Erich got the sense that his brother would be sufficiently amused by a sudden declaration to give up and live a life of unrestrained hedonism that he wouldn’t hassle him about the expense. Otto’s peculiarities were a touch more personal than he needed to get with Tanya. “It was a good thing my brother loved being a big fish in a small pond and I couldn’t wait to leave,” he went on. “Like many second sons in my position, the Army was a natural career path.” So many questions he’d never wanted answered bubbled up to compete for attention: Was this what he wanted? Or simply easier than searching for it and pursuing something else? Would he have been allowed to pursue something else? He’d stopped the nightly ritual of asking them to himself around sixteen, the ticking clock bearing down on the day he signed the next twenty years away mercifully forcing him to conclude it was childish to believe there was a single answer, right or wrong, to how he was meant to make the best of his life. For nearly a decade and a half he’d lived unhindered by those questions. They’d been waiting their turn to reappear. Right answers to life might not exist. Wrong ones sure as hell did. He was walking next to his living proof. “I don’t know if I had a choice,” he admitted. “I guess I never will. Maybe if I’d discovered an undying passion for botany I’d have been sent off to university instead of cadet school. But, I enjoyed the thought of myself as a soldier as much as the next boy. Though I suspect different parts appealed to me than most.” Tanya gave a subtle sigh, and there was no mistaking it for anything other than disappointment. For the first time in his life, a disappointment was exactly what he was aiming to be. It might get it through her head that he had sympathy for the fact that it was an unavoidable part of the human condition. Let her be just as disappointed that he might have considered other paths for himself as he was that she hadn’t done the same. “If you were to go dig up my transcripts you’d see high marks,” he said. “Top of the class marks. What is absent on the record is that there were things I didn’t take to all so naturally. Shouting was one. I’ll admit I’m rather fond of explaining to people how they’re wrong. Yelling always struck me as counterproductive in that endeavor. The expected roughhousing when you jam a bunch of competitive teenaged boys together was another sticking point. Luckily, I hit my growth spurt early so I could skate by without being a walking bruise until I toughened up a bit.” “Before I could use my orb, I got off easy for exactly the opposite reason,” Tanya laughed. He chuckled in response, mostly at the idea that people existed who were afraid of landing a solid blow on Tanya for reasons not including the devastating return hit. It was rare that he could see her as close to how she might appear to someone passing her on the street - diminutive in stature, youthful, female - the least worthy of all opponents. Her presence towered and cast shadows, her intellect exceeded her by years, her instincts were to compete, to tell, to escalate, not collaborate, suggest, defuse. He turned them at the next bridge, this one over the Panke, crossing back into western Berun and accidentally setting them on a path to circumnavigate the train station. Not the peek into the calmer side of the city he’d intended to give. If Tanya noticed, she kept silent. It was too late to fix unless they wanted to backtrack. “By the time I graduated, we’d pushed our boundaries further into Norden, gotten ourselves a handy demilitarized zone declared, and the Republic was afraid we’d do the same in Alsatia,” he continued. “To no one’s surprise in hindsight, the François got preemptively belligerent, so I was sent to go stand on our side of the border.” Their scenic tour proceeded along the side of the courthouse. Next stop, the local prison. “It’s terrible to say,” he laughed, thanking his eighteen-year-old self for taking the opportunity to have some fun at the expense of staying on task at all times, “but none of us took it that seriously. We were all men, with the exception of the rare ranking officer all about the same age and bursting with Imperial pride, under enough pressure to form a cohesive unit, but not enough to crack. In retrospect, my job was more like being the junior captain of a sports team than anything else. Up until things got hairy for a few months and we were in a series of what we were repeatedly told were isolated incidents. A short war in all but name.” “And you were promoted after?” she verified. He nodded. “So you killed more enemies of the Fatherland than the guys standing next to you, I guess,” she chuckled. “Umm,” he hesitated, looking down at the cracked pavement beneath his feet, kicking himself for getting on the subject. “I don’t think so. I did fire a weapon in the general direction of other people a few times, but knowing the numbers on shots fired to casualties, it’s statistically rather improbable. It was almost certainly brains over bullets that sent me upwards, if you will.” For a long moment, Tanya just looked at him. Tried to pretend she wasn’t, which made the withering, disapproving glare worse. Silent - too silent - moments passed, the only sound their footsteps, his heavy, hers lighter, walking them past the door of the jail. Go, he wanted to say to her. Go in there. You’ll find your people. After she’d won the Silver Wings, the Army had sent a doctor in to assess her fitness for re-entry into combat. She was overjoyed to have eliminated enemy soldiers, of course. Adamant that she wasn’t a liability and was fit to serve. Some of the rest had been more telling: I didn’t feel the life slowly bleeding out of them, or anything. It was very anticlimactic. “Anyway,” Lehrgen continued. “I ended up back here, an adjutant myself to someone on the General Staff. And I did good work. Great work. Worked very hard. All the same - and this is between us - there were the odd days when I was finished with all the work I really needed to do and it was nice outside and I had the choice between spending an hour making my reports a quarter of a percent better or going to retrieve documents that I didn’t plan on actually using from the War College library, which required a leisurely stroll through the Tiergarten.” At the first side street past the prison, he turned them north, finally breaking free from the train station’s gravitational pull. He wasn’t entirely sure where he was going anymore, in more ways than one. “In Londinium, there was no War College to wander over to,” he said. “So one day, I took a gamble. I figured I’d find an excuse if I was caught. I wandered a bit, ended up finding this little vacant hillside behind where the trucks pulled into the local post office. The second time I went I was still terribly anxious I’d be found skipping out. After a while I realized no one...no one noticed. Maybe they noticed I wasn’t at my desk, but taking a break when I felt I deserved it and it wouldn’t interrupt anyone else’s day, it...I want to say it improved my performance the rest of the time.” The scenery snapped back into recognition. They were at an old parade ground, now a park with a newly-built sports stadium glowering over the landscape further in the distance. The grass was damp, and a little cold, but the sun was warm, so he took off his coat and spread it out to give them a place to sit. “I kept up the habit in War College,” he said, after Tanya had settled herself down next to him on their makeshift blanket, she with her feet to the ground and knees bent so her chin could rest against them, him with his legs crossed. “Giving myself permission to reset a little bit. I came all the way out here every so often, back when it was an empty parade ground most of the year. And that is the story of how I started smoking cigarettes.” Tanya’s head picked up in confusion. He let the joke be lost on her for a moment, let her think he really did tell her all that to explain the answer to an off-handed, rhetorical question she’d asked earlier. “I got promoted again,” he chuckled, throwing his hands in the air. “No matter how much I wanted a break, they weren’t as easy to take anymore. I needed something. Everyone needs something to get them through the day. Especially because I was in Personnel and had to live my life in fear of accidentally coming across my brother’s service record from his mandatory three years and seeing what people had to say about him.” Tanya gave him a brief smile. “I’m sure by then no one was judging you by his reputation.” “Oh no,” he laughed. “That’s not why I was worried. I still can’t bring myself to look. Despite being what I’m sure was a disgrace to the name of Imperial soldiers, there’s a very real chance if you compared our files it would be patently obvious that everyone liked him better.” “That can’t be true,” Tanya objected, with a frown. “At least, I hope it isn’t.” “I’m joking,” he laughed, giving a yawn and rubbing his hand across his eyes another time. His drinks were catching up with him. “I think. Anyway, my point is - or was, back when I started - perspective. You haven’t had the same opportunities everyone else has to know who I am outside a list of accomplishments that looks very nice on the surface. It felt presumptuous to expect you to take me at my word that I have some tolerance for the times we fall in the region between perfect and good enough.” The ground around them was fast becoming victim to Tanya’s hands, her confusion taken out on the blades she was picking at. “The irony that I gave you the same advice for getting through to Serebryakov I apparently needed myself isn’t lost on me,” he sighed. “I assure you.” “That doesn’t mean excellent work isn’t better than good enough,” she muttered, keeping her eyes staring blankly ahead of her. “Fine,” he acceded, falling back to lie down. Dealing with Tanya was exhausting precisely because she operated according to this mindset. “You aren’t wrong. On a professional level, I’m not going to tell you that you shouldn’t be devoting every ounce of your life to work. All I’m saying is that on a personal level, I’m not going to go out of my way to look for the times when you don’t. That’s it, really.” Her fingers - surprisingly well-manicured, he noticed, before he shut his eyes - continued their rout of the grass’s forces, pick, toss, pick, toss. He wondered what it was that made this information so hard for her to hear, like she was offended he was allowed to evaluate her on more than one axis, as more - or less, as it were - than the sum total of the boxes she so expertly ticked. As though the spaces in between didn’t count. It was a peaceful minute, eyes closed, doing nothing more than listening to the rhythmic fwip, fwip, fwip of individual blades of grass being pulled. He cracked an eye open when the sound came to a stop. Tanya was leaning on the arm closest to him, looking down, eyes so knowing and superior it prickled at his skin. “A long night working?” she smirked. “Not even close,” he declared, too caught up in refuting the hypocrisy she was trying to accuse him of to realize where it would lead the conversation. By now, she was surely old enough to catch what it implied if he told her someone had spent the night at his home the previous evening. The literal last thing he wanted to know about Tanya was whether her religious inclinations would judge him more harshly for not having a ring on his finger or if it would be her ultra-rational side judging him for involving emotions and not keeping things impersonal and efficient. “I was thinking of redecorating my house,” he lied quickly. “I got very caught up in it, and next thing I knew it was the middle of the night.” “Oh,” Tanya nodded, eyebrows raised in surprise. “A lot’s changed in the last few years. It’ll be good to modernize.” “I don’t know if I’ll go through with it,” he coughed, now having to steer away from needing to give Tanya a series of fake updates on how it was progressing. “Actually, a lot of the sleeplessness was laying in bed asking myself if I was really ready to commit to something more than a brief flirtation with the idea. I mean, I like my house the way it is, you know? I’m very used to it. And then you get to thinking that your parents would definitely not approve of the changes you were making to the plans. So maybe it’s best to do a little work here or there when you need to instead of diving in with both feet, which takes time and energy you aren’t sure you have, and…” His alcohol-induced rambling petered out. Tanya was staring at him again, this time like he was completely hopeless. He thought about telling the truth, saw only a future where letting these two parts of his life intersect resulted in Tanya meeting Elise, them hating each other for pulling his concentration away from what the other considered important, and nagging him all day to get rid of the distraction. Worse, they could like each other. No. He’d take being Berun’s most sentimental homeowner. There was some truth to the accusation. The overwhelming, sometimes garish décor reminded him fondly of Aunt Irma, who hadn’t had the energy for the smallest bit of labor because she’d thrown all of herself into being a good caretaker. She hadn’t baked the lemon tarts that had arrived like clockwork at his dorm, nor had she mailed them, but she had never forgotten to make sure they were baked and mailed, along with letters that sympathized with his every complaint. Plus, keeping her style made him at least ten percent more mysterious to anyone who came into his home. It was totally at odds with the rest of his personality. “I’m not sure I can be of much help,” Tanya sighed. “No,” Erich said, yawning again. “It’s just fresh in my mind. I didn’t expect you to have an answer.” He levered himself up to prevent an accidental nap. Out of habit, he offered a hand to Tanya once he was on his feet. To his surprise, she took it. The grip she wrapped around his thumb was as firm as his. The fingers that held it were cold as ice. As soon as she was standing, he retrieved his gloves from his pocket and held them out to her. She waved them away. “My pockets are warm,” she said. “I swear my hands and feet are always cold regardless. I can’t feel it most of the time.” “In my experience, that’s more common for women than not,” he nodded. Tanya grumbled out a sulky agreement. As he listened to his boots squelch in the mud and looked down to see the mess Tanya didn’t care was being made of her shoes, he couldn’t decide if it was funnier to imagine that she was more scandalized by being lumped in with other women or the idea that he’d felt enough of their hands to make generalizations. Both were hilariously extreme positions. The neighborhood he wandered them into had few of the landmarks he remembered. The decade since he was last there had built over the old tenements of the working poor with squat, unattractive apartment buildings catering to residents who could afford clean and new, with modern plumbing and electricity, but not beauty or luxury. Done wasting an hour trying to convince Tanya that she would have to let someone down one day and he was a safe person to practice on, since she’d already ruined his image of her long ago, he took the conversation back to the work they were supposed to be discussing. In too many words, he explained her newest project, telling her to work her hardest at making it thorough, backtracking first to tell her not to work so hard she finished anytime soon, and again to tell her not to make the project seem entirely doomed - it could form the blueprint of fortifications in the future, when the facts had changed a bit. The exhaustion-intoxication muddled what should have been a concise explanation. Tanya’s head perked up and peeked up a random street as they passed. On a whim, he turned down it. “Do you have any personal opinions you’d like to add to the project?” he asked. “I basically agree,” she said, shaking her head. “If we only line the François border and not our future one with the Lowlands, they’re just going to march through there. It’s the fastest way to our factories.” “You think so?” “It’s rather obvious.” “It’s obvious they’ll violate the sovereignty of a neutral country and risk the Commonwealth breathing down their necks?” “I’d bet on it,” Tanya nodded. “Stranger things have happened.” “That would be for the best, wouldn’t it?” he puzzled out. “We’d know their route and they’ll alienate a possible ally.” “In theory,” she replied, soft and contemplative. “In theory. All I can see is that it will make us complacent. Hubris will end up beating us, not the François.” Tanya looked at the floor when she performed mental calculations. Every so often at the ceiling. Both were a blank canvas to project her thoughts onto while her eyes darted around hunting for information in her mind. It was the fact that she kept her head level, quietly observing the movement of the street, that sent a chill down his spine. There was no calculation going on, no assembling of probabilities, no nothing besides a casual acknowledgement of self-evident truth, the same matter-of-fact way she’d called Stalyngrad a bloodbath before a single drop was spilled. It was like she really could see it. Her eyes went up and up again, to look in the window of one apartment. His followed. There was nothing to see besides gray curtains swaying lightly at the breeze. “What?” he asked. “That’s my place,” she said. “Must have left the window open this morning.” “Your perfectly organized apartment?” he winked. Her face flooded with color. He saw her right hand delve into her pocket and heard the jangle of keys, paid no attention to her left until it grabbed his wrist and tugged him along behind her. “I believe you,” he soothed. “I believed you the first time.” He leaned back as a counterweight and she relaxed. “One last thing, on this subject,” he said, shaking his finger in the air, able now to put into words the objection he’d felt but didn’t know how to say to her earlier declaration that best was always better. “And then you’re off for the rest of the afternoon. An appropriate start to the project you’ve been assigned.” She gave a sniff of laughter and took her keys the rest of the way out. “I never gave you any goals for the year. Something to work on. It’s hard to come up with one when your own are so high.” “I’m happy to hear where I could perform better,” she nodded. Three years from now, not even, he’d make the case for offering Tanya a position in the office. No matter how logical they wanted to pretend that decision would be, the scales of whether other officers saw her as more useful in the field or at a desk would be tipped by whether they wanted to personally work with her day-in, day-out. It was a blessing the previous heads of regional commands had largely retired. He knew how they’d vote. Romel had ended up with her that first time because absurdly, someone at the rank of major had pissed off one lieutenant general and petrified another so thoroughly neither had wanted to be under the same roof as her for a few months, so the Southern Continent it had been. She’d come a long way since then. Nobody avoided working with her anymore. At most, he received a certain look when he assigned people to projects with her, a twinge of why me. She hadn’t come quite so far that most people would volunteer to spend time around her. “Give yourself space to breathe every once in a while,” he ordered. She sighed. “Sir, I appreciate the consideration. I really do. But I’m not unhappy with-,” “For once, this isn’t about you, Degurechaff,” he interrupted. “Though I do think it could be nice for you. I’m not saying this because I think someone your age should be out having fun. You know what you want.” “Then…” “I have other people reporting to me,” he reminded her, fishing a second cigarette from his pocket to even out his mood. He was as close as he’d ever been to losing his temper on her. “People who do need space to breathe, when they can. I need it. And when you don’t give yourself that space, no one around you feels like they can take it, and I need them to so that when they’re back under the gun in a very literal way, they have a reason to believe that protecting everyone’s lives is worth it.” Since the day he met her, Tanya had her own personal reasons for pushing herself to her limits. More reasons wouldn’t make her work harder. What he prayed he could give her by forcing her to experience the parts of life she was so determined to miss were different goals to work towards. “Alright,” Tanya agreed suspiciously after a minute of contemplation, less agreeing with him than agreeing to do as he asked. “What do you want me to do?” “I can’t give you an answer to that,” he confessed. “And even if I could, it would defeat the purpose.” Tanya crossed her arms, weight shifting and dropping into one hip. Her head leaned to the side in unison, and her hair, free from any clips or gel to keep it in place, fell into her eyes again. The puff of air she used to clear the offending bangs melded perfectly with her exasperated posture. “That leaves me with nothing to measure myself against, sir,” she pointed out. “I know,” he replied. “And I also know that most recruits come to us as adults who have plenty of things besides work on their minds, so need to be taught and have it repeatedly reinforced that at the end of the day, they aren’t worth a damn if they can’t put themselves aside and do the job that needs doing. Which is why I have a whole speech practically memorized at this point about how now that you’re on the General Staff you’re with the best, so whatever you did to get to the top of your class of conscripted trainees isn’t going to cut it.” Very briefly, Tanya’s face switched to a humored expression before she returned it to one that communicated she wasn’t pleased with him. This was what he got for trying to be nice and understanding. “I can imagine that between being an age where you hadn’t yet established yourself and being ambitious on top of that, it’s hard to approach even the smallest thing with another mindset,” he continued. “But if you can’t see a little bit outside that dimension like everyone else, I think it’s going to be harder for you to make a permanent home for yourself in the office. Any office, really. And I want you to be able to do that.” Despite having no particular expectation for her reaction, the one he got wasn’t the one he was expecting. Continued annoyance at what she perceived as criticism, he would have understood. Grateful for his assistance, he would have understood. Instead, her expression froze into a blank stare. For a second he worried her brain had spontaneously combusted and he was soon going to see smoke coming out her ears. “You’ve done a fine job the past year,” he appeased. “But part of my job is to help you improve in the areas outside the ones you’re comfortable in. I’d like for you to let me do it. Give yourself some space to breathe. Okay?” “Okay,” she strangled out. “I’ll try.” Christ, he muttered to himself, waving her off for the day and repeating to himself over and over that he had to go back to work and not the bar. Did that have to be so hard? xXx I’ll try. I’ll try. I’ll try? I’ll try?! In all Tanya’s years in the workforce, such a shamefully pathetic answer had never crossed her lips. There were two correct answers to whether a task could be completed: yes, I can do it, or no, it can’t be done. No employee liked having to give the second answer. It was a natural, if unnecessary, hesitation not to want to admit a job was impossible. The trick was simply to deny the request in such a way that you made clear the impossibility wasn’t the result of a personal failing, but an inherent property of a task for which the correct tools or training had not been provided. Your manager, the company, customers, the laws of the universe, it could be anyone’s fault as long as you didn’t make it your own. An easy golden rule that she had nonetheless failed to follow. The bottom of her shoes were caked with dried mud. Tanya stomped it off on her way up the stairs. As soon as she was inside the door and free of her outerwear, she wasted no time falling onto her bed and doing what she’d been wanting to since her boss had invaded her personal space and confiscated her personal property. It wasn’t mature, and more than a bit silly, but she’d learned during the months leading up to college entrance exams that covering her face with a pillow and breathing into it for a couple minutes cured unwanted emotional turmoil. Frankly, she’d assumed she was long past needing to resort to this method. After landing her first job she’d had no need for anxiety - she’d had a blueprint to follow for success. She would have understood a relapse in the face of trench warfare. Though she’d gone into it determined to prove herself an excellent candidate for senior positions, she hadn’t been so arrogant as to believe that would magically alleviate the stress of constant struggles to survive. Off the top of her head, she could only think of one reason to explain her admittedly confusing lack of stoicism: experience. She didn’t remember dying. However, the fear of death could be broken down into three parts - fear of the unknown, fear of pain, and involuntary fear induced to trigger a biological imperative to not die. The unknown part had been removed thanks to Being X’s meddling. For relieving the pain aspect, she could thank magic. The desire of an organism not to die couldn’t be overcome by logic alone, but experience helped. Tanya didn’t remember dying. She did remember knowing she was going to die. Of course, she didn’t want to die violently again. First off, the rush of nervous adrenaline during the process could make her behave irrationally and pray for Being X to intervene, especially now that she knew it was within the realm of possibility, and so not particularly irrational. She at least wanted to be granted the dignity of dying as herself that she should have gotten the last time around, and a metaphysical death would rob her of that too. Besides that, she’d missed out on the chance to trade in some work milestones for personal ones, a time which had felt just around the corner in her original life. The truth was, she hadn’t expected much to change. She enjoyed working. All the same, having the freedom to devote herself to it because she wanted to was a fundamentally better position than doing it because she had to. On top of that, with the pressure of proving her objective value taken away, she’d have the option of discovering what pursuits she felt were inherently valuable to her as a human. Her timeline for reaching such milestones had changed; her desire to reach them had not. No matter that she didn’t want to meet an early demise again, there was no denying her experience with it had demystified the process. What Tanya did not have experience with was anything that had happened in the last hour and a half of her day. Ever since she was sixteen, she’d had a formula for determining her path to an optimal life. She signalled her value as human capital; her organization rewarded her for adding to its value. It was simple. She, very reasonably, preferred situations where all parties had clear expectations to fulfill. The nature of a workplace was to give each employee expectations to fulfill. Which was why she’d been battling nerves at the first sign that her boss did not plan on fulfilling his duty to allow her to present information in the most useful and efficient way she could. The sudden unpredictability had frozen her with internal turmoil. If she didn’t know how he was going to respond, there was no obvious answer for how she could achieve her own goals. The first fifteen minutes of her “meeting” - during which time she’d been denied access to her possessions, been reminded she’d only be treated differently as a woman when it wasn’t convenient for her, implied she’d violated the wartime ban on mages smoking, and been made the butt of a long joke - had triggered a reflex she’d thought long gone: reaching for a cigarette when she was fed up with life. Tanya had never been a smoker, or at risk of becoming one. That said, life in Japan hadn’t exactly left her uninitiated in the pleasant side effects of nicotine. The vastly unpleasant taste and health risks had guaranteed she stayed away from forming a habit, but once in a blue moon, she hadn’t been able to avoid thinking that one wasn’t going to kill her after a particularly bad day. Second-hand smoke had been responsible for far more damage than the very occasional fix. In the end, she’d been right. Twice a year hadn’t been what killed her. The fact that Lehrgen had been respectful enough to hold his cigarette with the hand further away from her had been all that kept her from a second attempt at substance abuse when he’d gone and revived The Episode from two weeks ago. She’d been counting on nobody but her thinking of it ever again. She had not spilled coffee on her pants. What she had done was stand up and realize her reminder she wasn’t bound for motherhood had arrived and spent two hours making an unsupervised mess befitting the infant it was substituting for. Thank...some fashion designer, somewhere...that black pants were the norm. So yes, she’d sounded a little desperate when she’d called her boss to ask if she could run home. She couldn’t deny that. Next time, she was just going to tell him, and then play dumb about why a grown man couldn’t handle the news well when his entire job centered around exsanguinating people. She could see it going over really well. In the end, Tanya had felt more guilty than annoyed by the unplanned direction her day had gone. Given the facts that Lehrgen knew about her life, he’d plausibly deduced that she was overworking herself in an attempt to emulate the high standards his spotless record set, and that warfare at a tender age had indelibly imprinted on her subconscious that every mistake could be counted in bodies. By not foreseeing she would react this way, one of the most consistently useful people in either of her lifetimes had concluded he was a derelict manager. Truth be told, the types who had the internal fortitude to proactively blame themselves for other people’s problems were somewhat of a mystery to her. Nonetheless, she couldn’t escape feeling badly that in this case, the problems were hers. Tanya gave an annoyed huff into her impromptu face-covering. Another realm of inexperience to explore was being the employee that caused other employees trouble. Her preferred solution of proving that she was worth having around - taking on some extra work - she had been specifically barred from. She’d gone into her new work life tailoring her actions based on her assumption of what her organization wanted to see. Clearly, as evidenced by her meteoric rise to lieutenant colonel, logic worked the same everywhere. The same approach she’d taken to her last career was equally as valid for this one. The military was on the outer extreme of valuing outcomes over all else. In the history of major conflicts, she was pretty sure no combatant had gone in with the intention of losing. Wanting to win was a given, and counted for absolutely nothing. The result - win or lose - was all anyone cared about. From that, she could safely extrapolate that Lehrgen, who’d blazed through his promotions and attained a rank of decent importance, conformed closely to the Army’s value system and rated his colleagues based on their own ability to do the same. In many ways, such a strict organizational culture was a perfect fit for her. Whether it was hours spent in a chair, quantity of work completed, or quality of work completed, goal-oriented high-performers possessed a natural advantage on a field where utility was the be-all, end-all. It wouldn’t be unreasonable for Lehrgen to adjust to peacetime by shifting his mindset to allow intent to have some space beside outcome in his personnel assessments. This was precisely the time to work on developing the skills of employees with high potential but mediocre performance. In that case, she would have received a thank you for her continued excellence and a quick reminder that it was beyond the current requirements for her position. Instead, her boss had been visibly annoyed by it. To be honest, it had occurred to her that Lehrgen’s advice could be an attempt at sabotage. It was the most straightforward explanation. She’d once joked with Lehrgen that she’d like to have his job. He’d now had a year to observe that she was capable of maintaining the pressure necessary for stellar performance on her own, something he admitted to being less able to do. Torn between wanting to keep her talent in-house and not wanting her to take his promotions from him, his smartest move was to bring her down to his level and pretend it was for everyone’s benefit, including her own. Nothing about that fit in with her image of a man who wanted what was best for his country, but most importantly the people in it. Still, she had to hedge her bets. Sauer had given her what might have been a prophetic warning that their boss had a skill for arranging things how he wanted them while looking innocent the whole time. Until she’d done some more observation, it would be unwise to pal around with anyone else who’d have a say in her future. Assuming no malicious intent, Tanya had to confront the possibility that Lehrgen, a pure example of traditional Imperial upbringing, had a valuable supplement to add to her tried-and-true method for upwards corporate mobility. In this situation, there was some logic to the sentiment that after a certain point, less was more. At a typical job, feeling pressured to live up to the standards of the most dedicated employees created something of a virtuous cycle from the company’s perspective. Everyone stayed late because everyone else was staying late, no salary adjustments necessary. The caveat was that in the business world, a burned out employee was relatively limited in the amount of damage they could cause. The second they became more of a burden than a boon, they could be replaced with someone fresher. At worst, you were facing projects left with loose ends if someone snapped and quit on the spot. To avoid that, all a good manager needed to do was ensure there was enough overlap on their team to keep things running smoothly. The same could not be said for the only job Lehrgen was familiar with, starting with the fact that nobody wanted the man next to them to snap when he had a gun and knew how to use it. Available fresh replacements were a hope, not an expectation. No amount of cross-training could overcome a critical capacity issue. It was why rotating men off frontline duty was nearly as important as putting them on it. Even during peacetime, there was still a moribund hiring and firing process to account for. Tanya didn’t like it, but at least while her boss was watching, she’d need to deviate off the script that guaranteed success once in a while. What he asked wasn’t, on its face, much of a hardship. All the same, what to cut back, when, and by how much were all decisions which could be made incorrectly, and Lehrgen was intent on keeping the answer key to himself. Choose wrong and slack off on one of his pet projects, and she was in a significantly worse place than she would have been in blatantly disregarding her stated goal for the year. Hence, her mortifying response of “I’ll try.” She wanted to be angrier about it than she was. The fact that she hadn’t been given concrete instructions was indicative of Lehrgen trusting that she had a long life of managing office underlings during peacetime ahead of her. Otherwise, there’d be no need for teaching. He could order her to go home early or take a lunch break as it came up, or any of the other things she’d done when she’d wanted her own subordinates to rest in advance of a sortie. Her saving grace, such as it was: feeling that he’d failed her meant Lehrgen had taken it upon himself to teach her the ropes with a far gentler method than she herself employed. Tanya considered herself a good teacher. Nevertheless, she could admit that she took a rather harsh sink-or-swim approach with her students. The key to success was to be an accurate judge of how deep of water they could swim in. But once they were at sea, she left it up to them to get back to shore. It was fast, and it was effective. She had to believe Lehrgen largely did the same with others, and with himself. He wouldn’t be where he was otherwise. This time, though, by all indications he was going to do his best to see to it that there was no drowning. He wanted to do his job and do it well, so would hold onto her until she learned how to kick. Then why do I have this pillow over my face? Tanya questioned herself. No stress, no need for stress relief. No - that might have been the root of the issue. She was being asked to perform a task with no quantifiable metrics for rating her results. And yet, because she wasn’t being left on her own to fail, she was facing the worst case scenario - she’d have no one to blame but herself in the event she disappointed. Today had catapulted her into a whole host of unwanted firsts. In a childish fit of having no way to express her frustration, Tanya threw her pillow across the room. She was familiar enough with the wanting to be good enough without knowing she was good enough sensation before tests or big presentations, where you had to hope the hours you’d spent preparing were on memorizing the right things and you wouldn’t be thrown a series of curveballs. Those days came, and most importantly, they passed. People, on the other hand, had never qualified as something to get anxious over, except perhaps when she’d been very young. She knew what she brought to the table. The role - superior, subordinate, drinking buddy, high school friend, son, romantic partner - determined expectations. It was then a matter of choosing her own skills to best meet their demands. Feeling immature for lashing out at an inanimate object, Tanya replaced her pillow where it belonged and took a seat at her table, whose only decorations were, handily, a paper and pen. While she’d been specifically instructed not to worry about meeting a deadline with this next project, she wanted to refocus on the parts of her life that did feel in control. Expounding upon the virtues and vices of the opposite-day Maginot Line from a military perspective was well within her abilities, but overall, slightly besides the point from her perspective. The saying about good fences making good neighbors didn’t really encapsulate a context in which one neighbor equipped their fence with high-powered artillery pointed at the other’s yard. Building massive defensive fortifications was a very pointed way of saying you’d all but given up on having friendly relations, so were already planning for the next war. Her patriotic duty to dislike the Republic aside, that type of single-mindedness was essentially what had caused a world war. On the subject of Lehrgen’s functional value, where else was she going to find a boss who’d casually hand her a golden ticket to helping avoid another? She’d been told to indulge herself in any tangents she so desired. It was doubtful that was meant to include a tangent on the feasibility of economic integration between the Empire and Republic, but it was on topic enough to pass muster. Nobody went to war with their largest trading partners if they could help it. Once they were intertwined deeply enough, a war become closer to a suicide pact than a winnable conflict. Romel, please allow me the pleasure of introducing you to Juliet, Tanya mimed in her head. You’re always complaining about your wife, so I’ve found you a new one. She had to keep her audience in mind. Army men weren’t the types that got swayed by waxing poetic on removing barriers to free trade. The language of economics was full of aggressive terms. She wasn’t advocating peaceful resolution, just a different flavor of hostile takeover. With enough obfuscating language, she could avoid alerting anyone that the Empire was going to get equally as tied up as the Republic. Tanya put her pen to paper with a smile. There were days she really loved this job. Thanks to her lunchtime alcohol intake, it had her feeling all giddy about the potential future. xXx “...Sir?” At his adjutant’s confused query, Erwin von Romel replaced the smile on his face with his usual glower. He had a sixth sense for knowing when somebody besides himself was thinking it might be best if he got divorced. You can do it, Lucy! he cheered his wife on. Why didn’t he divorce her? Did he look like a man with either the time or the inclination to draw up that much paperwork? He’d sign it. That was it. Probably, the reason she was thinking about it was because he was staying extra-late at work. Again. It was easier to do that than come home an hour late when she still had plenty of energy to argue. Better to wait until she gave up and went to bed. According to her, he’d promised to retire after the war. According to him, she’d extracted that promise using very unfair tactics that wouldn’t produce permissible evidence in a court of law. Ah. No. His adjutant was confused because of something else, and was pointing at the word on the paper that didn’t fit. Every time he used Lehrgen for unapproved purposes he had to come up with an excuse as to why. Willy was catching on. Damn. He liked Willy. He didn’t want to trade him for someone new. It was all Zettour’s fault that Romel was dictating notes that included the possibility of a foreign excursion for a man who really had no business making them. His predecessor’s philosophy had been that making Lehrgen a pretty - or, well, that might be overstating it - but a decoration on the side of international agreements served two purposes. First, it looked like they were sending their resident choirboy, who by the way had a serious job back home, to review things on behalf of the Army, a message that they intended to keep a pristine record, no funny business. Second, the real reason, sending Lehrgen around to innocuous minor events guaranteed his usability in the event he did need to go negotiate some funny business. Nothing to see here, just the usual. What a sly fucker Zettour was. The country was lucky Romel was in charge. He was doing no more than enough to keep all sides satisfied. There was Lucy’s reason for why he was still working. God knew who they’d replace him with. Why his wife had it in her head that just because he’d married her she got to be most important was beyond him. And people accused him of being arrogant. 




 

 The road behind was rocky, and now you’re feeling cocky






 
 "There is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked about."
 
 May 9, 1931Berun-Charité Hospital
 The metal handle on the door to Visha’s room was cold to the touch. The hallway was drafty. The morning had so far been rainy. The nurse at the desk had acted more annoyed than usual that Tanya showed up exclusively towards the beginning or end of visiting hours. Nothing about the day was boding well for what would happen when she entered the room in front of her. Tanya had flown beneath artillery strikes. She once lost her entire right arm during her time testing the Type 95. It hadn’t hurt, and had been repaired within the day, but looking at the empty space had been stomach-turning, to say the least. She’d encountered more ardent Communists in this lifetime than the one in which she’d actually traveled to China. She’d met a variety of supernatural beings in some other dimension, all of which had it out for her. When she’d originally been twenty, she’d missed a once-in-a-lifetime chance for a meet-and-greet with a famous lecturer because the friend she’d gone with had gotten sick and hadn’t been mature enough to seek medical attention by himself. Compared to being in Weiss’s shoes the next time he saw Visha? Tanya considered herself the one who’d gotten off easy. Returning to his old ways as a rambunctious thrill-seeker, her former second-in-command had written two weeks ago to inform her he desired her presence while he dove headlong into married life. Call her naive, but she thought she’d raised him better than that. She was quite positive they’d reviewed several lessons on how triple-checking your safety measures was better than dealing with the fallout when they failed. He wasn’t even applying the loss-mitigation techniques she’d taught him for worst-case scenarios. At this point, Weiss was more or less dead to her. She wasn’t in the business of spending her time on building useless relationships. She’d treat his wedding as his funeral, and say her goodbyes to someone who was going to become a dead man walking as soon as she spilled the beans to Visha. Would his bride-to-be’s brothers, uncles, or other offended family attempt murder for delaying marriage in the face of a surprise preganancy? Possibly. On the other, Weiss was a tall, broad, muscle-bound mage. He could hold his own in a fight with some regular citizens. What he’d failed to consider was whether he could hold his own in a fight with a vengeful Visha after she’d explicitly told him to wait until she was well enough to attend before he got up in front of an altar. Their mutual friend had thoughtfully left it up to Tanya to break the news. After taking a deep breath, she turned the handle and walked into Visha’s room, a suitcase full of fashion questions dragged along behind her. Visha was in her chair, playing a game of cards against herself. Her eyes drifted to Tanya’s luggage. “Going on vacation?” “Next week,” she replied. “I wanted to get your advice on my outfit.” Tanya opened her trunk stuffed full with as many dresses as would fit. Aside from avoiding a black or white one, she had little in the way of knowledge over which items from the back of her closet counted for appropriate in this circumstance. Not only did being a woman mean that a single outfit was no longer almost-universally applicable for formalwear, she’d picked up from Elya’s ramblings that wearing certain colors and materials was dictated by a variety of minute considerations. Tanya could do without being the most fashionable attendee of Weiss’s wedding. She could also do without the pointing and staring that might come along from picking out her own outfit. One of Visha’s eyebrows arced up. “Did you buy all these?” “Ugar’s wife took me shopping last summer. I’ll take the one you pick to the seamstress if it needs to be altered.” “Now that makes more sense,” Visha laughed. “What’s the occasion?” “A wedding.” “Oh. Whose?” Tanya gulped. The moment of truth had come. “Weiss.” She groaned internally a few seconds of silence later. She’d have to get herself mentally prepared to tell Visha a second time. She’d drifted off at the most inopportune moment possible, evidenced by the fact that Tanya hadn’t received the reaction she’d wanted. Well, wanted wasn’t the right word. In all her time on two earths, she was positive she’d never wanted someone to screech directly into her ears. It was better to say she hadn’t gotten the reaction she expected. “Serebryakov?” Tanya asked, waving a hand out. “Did you hear me?” Visha’s head snapped up. “Hmm?” she asked. “Oh. Yes. I’m just...processing.” By the look on her face, if Visha was “processing” something, it was a malicious piece of malware. “It’s like, I can’t say anything because I know if I start, I won’t stop,” she continued. The dissonant smile on Visha’s lips made her expression all the more menacing. When the other woman was in a better mood, Tanya would have to warn her that making happy faces at the wrong time made a person look more than a little insane. “It’s not that he didn’t want you there,” Tanya assured hastily. “But, um...he says you’re going to be the godmother. There’s a baby on the way.” “You aren’t serious.” Tanya shrugged. Visha dropped her forehead down to meet the table, then shook it back and forth a couple times. Interspersed throughout were mumbles of what sounded like idiot over and over again. “Alright.” Visha picked herself back up with false cheer. “Let me help me with your dress.” Visha had seen her in various states of undress too many times to count. To her, Tanya was nothing more than another woman, of a similar, albeit slightly less appealing, shape as her own. Nevertheless, Tanya couldn’t help feeling somewhat awkward appearing minimally-clothed in front of another person for the first time since she’d outgrown the body of an androgynous child, and now very definitely looked like someone an old class- or workmate might have stared at for reasons beyond aesthetic appreciation. It would have been better to have put on one of her dresses before she left the house. Then she’d at least have the slip already on underneath it to preserve some modesty. Tanya would have to remember to thank Weiss for roping her in - along with Visha’s aunt and uncle - to chipping in for a private room. Originally, she hadn’t seen the point. The other woman had been used to sharing, and might welcome the company after her time alone. As soon as she turned around, she could read the tell-tale signs of distraction on Visha’s face. It wasn’t uncommon, as of yet, to see her attention drift once she wasn’t being actively engaged in something. “Serebryakov,” Tanya called a second time, taking one hand away from its task of finishing up a few final buttons to motion at her. “Ah,” she startled. Her face shifted to red-tinged cheeks over not being able to keep up. “Sorry.” Tanya went through a routine of donning an item, lifting her arms, walking, and turning in a circle for each dress, then underwent a second round for the ones Visha had deemed her favorites. Enough times for her to feel like she was more of a circus animal performing for a trainer than anything else. It was decided, with none of her own input, that one of her most ostentatious pieces, made of some kind of light purple gauzy material, was the one. Visha’s pout indicated she’d caught the look on Tanya’s face. “It’s perfect for a spring wedding.” Tanya crossed her arms. “If I’m going to stand out anyway, I’ll go buy a suit and wear that.” “It’s spring,” Visha said, crossing her arms in response. “Everyone who can afford more than one nice dress will be in light colors. The navy blue one you like would stand out way more. That one had Christmas written all over it.” Visha was the expert between the two of them. Tanya was left with no choice but to accept her fate. In the back of her mind, she did have to wonder if Visha was already in the beginnings of her revenge plot against Weiss, sending her to his wedding in a fancier dress than the bride might be wearing. “You should be glad Elya isn’t here to give her advice,” Visha went on, unsatisfied with Tanya’s unenthusiastic acquiescence. “She’d tell you the truth, which is that all of your hemlines need to be taken up a dozen centimeters if you care about making an impression. You’re not the mother of the bride.” In recent months, Tanya’s opinion of Elya had ameliorated somewhat, as, apparently, had Elya’s of her. Without being constrained by feeling she was responsible for cheering Visha up, Elya’s monthly weekend visits featured a wider variety of topics, some of which were actually interesting. That aside, it wasn’t much of a surprise to hear that Visha was in touch with current trends in spite of being mostly confined to a hospital. Every month Elya left a flurry of magazines in her wake. As promised by her boss, Tanya could now claim to know enough about Elya’s romantic drama to pass for a daytime television aficionado. A part of her commended Elya for her dedication to her career. Her other half remained skeptical of anyone so devoted to the military that they’d forego everything else for it. Unfortunately for Lehrgen, a slip of his tongue had gotten him caught up in Elya’s grievances. According to the other woman, he shared a salient opinion with her boyfriend - he didn’t expect his wife to work either. It wasn’t progressive. It was far from unusual for the times. It was someone else’s fight to have with him. Due to spending the most time in his presence, Elya had assigned her the duty of battling it out. Every other time his name left Tanya’s mouth, it seemed, Elya was there to remind her that he’d once said something that as a theoretical point of discussion, they might disagree over. No matter how many times she tried, she couldn’t get it through Elya’s head that maintaining her relationship with her boss in the real world was more important to her than winning points in a philosophical argument. It was baffling how resistant otherwise intelligent minds could be to simple concepts, like that burning bridges unnecessarily was pointless, and that waiting to cross bridges when you got to them avoided a host of other troubles. Besides that, Elya harped on the fact that she was pretty sure Lehrgen was seeing someone. Conversely, they spent a good amount of time diagnosing him with commitment issues. As someone who’d once been an adult man dedicated to his career, it was rather worrisome to learn how often young women made thorough assessments of their coworkers’ personal business. Out of sympathy, she would normally feel obligated to tell her boss. She hadn’t gotten around to it yet. She expected the subject to rotate out of fashion once Elya resolved her relationship issues. Clearly, they were causing her to lash out at men generally. Lehrgen was happier not knowing. One explanation that occurred to her was that this could be some irrational form of jealousy. Elya and Lehrgen spoke about each other on more personal terms than their ranks or job postings would indicate. As it was difficult to believe even the most upstanding officer could reject Elya’s advances outright, it was quite plausible they’d become involved at some point, and Elya now fancied herself a victim of these commitment issues. Why she was bitter about it, Tanya couldn’t fathom. After seeing far too many photos of Elya’s boyfriend, she could say that as far as looks went, Elya had snagged someone as close to Lieutenant Sauer’s unattainable golden standard as she was going to get. And as she understood it, her beau’s family business was more like the family conglomerate. On all counts, Elya seemed to have traded upwards. If anything, she owed Lehrgen a thanks for letting her go painlessly. Some days, it struck her that getting invited into the circle of private female conversation made women all the more foreign to her. Tanya finished packing her dresses back into the suitcase she’d used to transport them and then stood up. “We haven’t talked about your shoes,” Visha commented. “Tripping over your heels all the time will definitely make you stand out.” Fortunately, Tanya had planned ahead for both that problem and that question. She rifled through her bag and pulled out a pair of flat shoes. To the best of her ability, she’d judged them a halfway point between oxfords and slippers. They were mostly in the shape of the former, with a daintier cut and a white-and-beige color scheme. Like slippers, they lacked a tongue, and laced directly against the foot. Visha clicked her tongue. “Are you going to be outside most of the time?” “Yes?” “Then you can get away with them,” she sighed. “When are you leaving?” “Friday.” Tanya took her seat across from Visha at the table again. “I’ll be gone a week. My boss thinks I need to make myself take more breaks.” Visha flashed a smile as she shuffled her cards and began dealing. Even with her propensity for growing distracted, she beat Tanya more often than not. “Then he’s a smart man.” Tanya mumbled out a noncommittal agreement. She had yet to determine just what she was meant to do with herself for a week deep into the countryside without a car or an Internet connection. “Don’t grumble,” Visha lectured. “You’ll have fun. I wish I were going. I want you to come back with a picture that has you with a big smile on your face.” Despite her warning, Tanya grumbled out another response to that. “Let’s see it,” Visha said. “What?” “You. Smiling. For real. A big one. It’s been a long time.” To encourage her, Visha pulled her lips apart as far as they would go, like a child trying to smile on command. Feeling ridiculous about doing the same, Tanya laughed at the silly look on Visha’s face. In the end, the result was what Visha had been looking for. “Aww,” Visha cooed. She heaved her weight to roll over her left arm and used it to lean across the table. Her right hand went to Tanya's cheek and pulled her lower lip back again. “It’s still there.” Tanya jerked backwards. “What?” “Where your second tooth comes over your first a little.” Visha dropped back into her chair and unconsciously touched the same spot on her own mouth. “I thought it was very endearing when I first met you. But you were still losing your baby teeth, so I wasn’t sure if…” She drifted off and shrugged. Tanya struggled not to blush at being reminded that she’d begun the war barking orders with a lisp because she’d been missing some teeth on the top row. She hadn’t really noticed the flaw herself. It was surprising Visha had. “Let me see your teeth again,” Tanya ordered, a remembered piece of cultural trivia coming to her. Obediently, Visha drew her lips back a second time. As Tanya had suspected, they were perfectly straight to a cursory inspection. She hopped out of her seat to go have a look in the mirror. Now that she concentrated on her smile, she could see more than one issue some Western dentist obsessed with straight teeth might want to fix. From her perspective, there was nothing notably wrong with them. It was how it had escaped her notice that she might be constantly broadcasting her low-class origins for everyone to see. Regular dental check-ups weren’t yet the norm. Deplorably, so many years spent in the past had eroded her previously pristine attendance record. She’d have to see to that after her vacation. The real question was whether it was worth compounding her problem of appearing too young for her job by adding braces. Since she wasn’t actively searching for a new position, she had the time to make a fool out of herself now if it would pay off in the future. Visha was frowning at her when she sat back down. “You know I wasn’t trying to make fun of you, right?” “I know,” Tanya hummed, picking her cards up. “I just never thought about it before.” Remorseless as always, Visha took the first hand and started racking up her points. “If you were sorry about it, you could let me win more than two rounds,” Tanya suggested. Visha laughed. “Dream on.” 
 May 15, 1931Marberg, Imperial Province of Hessia
 Tanya read maps well. It wasn’t a boast. Just a simple fact. She’d found a certain beauty in them ever since adolescence. Had she ever gotten around to furnishing her old apartment in a way that might suggest it was a semi-permanent home, she probably would have had some framed to hang on the walls. There was something immeasurably fascinating in the way they connected everything. With the coming of her second life, map-reading had been upgraded from an increasingly less-useful hobby to a survival skill. Frankly, her mind’s eye could picture the lay of her new land - its borders, its industrial areas, its primary rail routes - in much clearer detail than it could the back of her hand. And yet, it had taken her an embarrassing length of time to first locate the village she’d be staying in that week, and then to figure out how to get to it. Weiss’s hometown wasn’t particularly close to a border, a city, or any transit routes. It wasn’t particularly close to anything, except other small villages. Stepping off her train at the nearest town that got service from a national line, Tanya’s mental map began to fill in, feeling strangely like she was exploring a PC game and getting rid of unknown territory. It wasn’t difficult to locate Weiss after she exited the station. There were all of four cars idling on the street out front. Ultimately, she’d failed to connect the dots together on how she was supposed to reach his village without walking. She’d found a local train that she could take to get closer, inclusive of a day’s wait to make the connection the next morning. And that was about it. Her job gave her easy access to every timetable the country had seen since trains were invented, and on none of them could she find the name of the village she needed. She’d later been informed there was a bus with no published schedule. By then it had been a moot point. Weiss had offered to retrieve her after her initial disembarkation. One firm handshake later, she was in his car. “How did Visha take the news?” he asked cautiously, once they’d pulled onto the main road. Tanya shrugged. “Better than I expected, honestly. Presumably because she gets to look forward to cooing over a baby later.” Tanya looked towards the window to hide her frown. It was somewhat disheartening to remember Visha had been brainwashed into thinking something was wrong with her if she didn’t adore babies. By extension, everyone was going to think something was wrong with Tanya when she inevitably failed to look properly enthusiastic. Babies were cute and fun and adorable little bundles of joy. For five minutes, if you were lucky. After that, you were either playing a mindlessly repetitive game to entertain them or they were crying. In her admittedly limited experience, those were the only two outcomes. “Congratulations,” she offered to Weiss. “I guess.” He took his hand off the gear shift to nudge her with his elbow. “You guess?” “It’s not clear to me that you wanted to be in this position,” Tanya explained. “So if you need someone to be honest with…” “No.” Weiss turned and took them out of the town and onto what passed for a highway out there. “Thank you. No. I’d wanted to save up a little more money first, but besides that, it’s all good.” Tanya gave a nod and turned her head to lean on the window. No matter how hard she tried, she couldn’t see the attraction of living in the countryside. Visiting, yes. As their drive took them through the valley carved out by the Eder River, through endless This- and That-hausens, there was no denying the beauty. She understood the pull of a respite from city life in the idyllic calm of the Empire’s rural reaches. However, she’d long ago had to give up on trying to understand why anyone chose to live without the luxury of reliable public services. If you she was going to pay taxes, she was going to get something out of it. “How’s work?” Weiss ventured. “Fine. Good. I’ve always-,” Tanya caught herself before saying she’d always enjoyed military history, and with it a healthy dose of strategy, as a side hobby, after a very brief reflection on the infeasibility of an orphan child having access to that kind of knowledge before enlisting. In many ways, her present employment status was perfect. It was safe, it was stable, it paid enough over her low cost-of-living needs to provide for an ever-growing safety cushion and eventual investment opportunities. On top of the basic requirements she’d once treated as a given, she was working in a job that aligned with a personal hobby, among coworkers who already knew and respected her talents, under a boss that made some room for what was in her best interest when considering what was in his. The best part: she had the option of resigning in protest if she didn’t like what she was being asked to do. It hadn’t been the job she was originally looking for, but there had been no reason to turn down an offer of good pay and good experience just because she’d gone in with the intention of getting an employment reference, not an employment contract. She would have been happy to keep working under such conditions indefinitely. She was realistic enough to understand that wasn’t going to be possible. Until she reached enlistment age, sticking it out where she was made the most sense. She kept her fingers on the pulse of when, where, and how large future conflicts were likely to be, occasionally got to put them in the pot to stir it in the direction she wanted, and at the same time built out her résumé with projects far above and beyond the level of importance she’d likely be trusted with elsewhere. In two years, when she had to decide whether she was going to give up her precious freedom to quit again or not, her current track both left the most options open to her as her age and qualifications marched upwards with time, and prepared her best for predicting whether she’d be safer in the future as an officer or as a private citizen. Plus, while she could tolerate a boss she disliked as well as the next salaryman, the more years she could guarantee she didn’t have to, the better. “The theoretical side of it all is perfectly interesting,” she explained to Weiss, giving a contented sigh. “So I’m happy where I am. But I guess I’m only saying that because for now, there’s no chance of frontline service.” Weiss gave a bark of laughter. A smile crossed Tanya’s face. It was freeing not to have to fake devotion to self-sacrifice in front of him anymore. It was equally satisfying to see that impending fatherhood had turned an old war junkie into someone who appreciated the sentiment. She’d have to thank his bride-to-be for finding a cure. “I hope you aren’t telling your boss that,” Weiss chuckled. Tanya crossed her arms over her chest. As if she couldn’t be trusted to know the time and place for such unpatriotic chit-chat. “Of course not.” “It’s funny, you know,” Weiss said, drumming his fingertips on the steering wheel. “Not that I talked with Lehrgen a whole lot when you were between us in the chain of command, but by then we got on fine. Back when I first met him, though, which might have been before you did - it was only in passing - I was pretty convinced if I got put under him it would be the worst assignment I ever got.” Tanya turned her head so Weiss could see her raised eyebrow. Like anyone, Lehrgen had his flaws. They were by no means enough to earn such dire words. She was curious over what she was missing. Since Lehrgen was so eager for her to look past his good work ethic and saintly code of conduct, Tanya was sure he wouldn’t mind her learning about it. “We were too different,” Weiss shrugged. “I wasn’t far out of high school. I still kind of saw the world that way. And he totally would have told the teacher if he found me copying someone else’s homework. You know it’s true.” Clearly, she and Weiss had different opinions on the expected reaction to that matter. Tanya had nothing against cheating per se. Life was a competition. Playing unfairly was a valid strategy so long as you could get away with it. On the other hand, for the student who wasn’t cheating, it could be said to be your duty not to let your classmates get ahead of you by breaking the rules. Assuming everyone had some sense of self-preservation, the natural answer was to file a complaint. “I’m not so sure,” Tanya replied, giving a shake of her head. “He’s more relaxed about things than I thought. After you know him long enough, at least.” “Like how?” “Like we took several shots of whiskey at one-thirty on a Thursday.” Weiss’s eyes traveled off the road and onto her, and stayed there for a dangerously long time. “I...why…?” he finally asked. “Is there something going on that I need to know about?” Tanya gave a rueful laugh while she shook her head. She could sympathize with the terror Weiss must be feeling right now, wondering what kind of disaster their country might be in for after learning that two stoic military officers had been driven to day drinking. “No, no, it was all friendly,” she rushed to assure him. “He hadn’t practiced his argument in advance, so he was losing it.” Her companion’s eyes remained stubbornly averse to watching the road. This time they closed while he laughed. Her own took in some of the scenery - gently rolling hills, cows, half-grown crops, the occasional farmhouse. At this rate, they were going to be the last she saw of this life. Thankfully, a small divot in the road brought Weiss’s attention back to where it belonged without sending them careening into a ditch. “It wasn’t that funny,” Tanya said, watching him use his thumb to swipe at the corner of an eye. “No, it’s the way you put things that’s funny,” he replied, voice still alive with humor. “It’s all so matter-of-fact. I used to have a hard time keeping a straight face in front of the others when you’d say something silly or absurd and do it all flat and practical.” Her former subordinate must have suffered from an odd sense of humor. Not once in her lives had Tanya ever been accused of being a regular comedian. “Anyway, I’m not sure how I feel about it,” she went on, switching back to their earlier topic. “Him. Things with my boss. I used to think we were on the same page, and now I’m all confused. I never used to second-guess what I said or what I did in front of him. It’s very…” She drifted off in search of accurate terminology. She couldn’t express the feeling without sounding angry. In the context of a person, challenging had an overwhelmingly negative connotation. In this case, she wanted to use it in a way more akin to calling a project at work challenging. The difficulty was precisely what made it more interesting and satisfactory than the next thing. “It’s good to learn to adapt to new situations, and he’s trying to help, so I’m not complaining,” she clarified. Her hands rose up to shake themselves next to her head so they could nonverbally communicate where words were failing her. “I’m just not sure I like feeling like I’m a bit off-balance all the time.” One of Weiss’s better qualities was that he didn’t tend to give advice that no one asked for. Because of it, he gave nothing more than a sympathetic nod and allowed silence to return. Thanks to the continued movements he was making with his head, and occasionally with his mouth, it didn’t escape Tanya that he had begun arguing inside his head. “What?” she finally asked. “Nothing, just…” he sighed, shoulders drooping towards the steering wheel. “Why don’t you ever say anything like this in your letters?” Tanya’s gut response was to snort in disbelief. “Who’d want to hear about that? I’m not going to bore you with trivialities.” On a purely personal level, the hardest part about meeting someone as their superior officer during wartime was turning out to be that it gave the wrong impression of your personality. Visha and Weiss had known her better than anyone, and had still gotten it wrong on a few counts. The fact that she’d rudely barked out orders when under pressure didn’t make her a rude person generally. Weiss had a life to attend to. Tanya wasn’t going to impose her own onto him simply because she could. Just as she was about to go back to staring out the window, Weiss broke in again to interrupt her thoughts. “I’m surprised you came,” he mumbled. “Without Visha dragging you along behind.” “Of course I came,” Tanya said, deciding she must have gone overboard on portraying herself as busy with work in the last few letters. “We’re friends.” “Are we?” Tanya sat up straighter in her seat and looked to her left. Now, Weiss wouldn’t look anywhere but the road. “I - of course we are.” “Well, apparently I bore you with trivialities.” As a rule, Tanya was a considerate person. In other words, not one often put into a position to eat her words. She could see her error now that Weiss had pointed it out. Most of what his letters contained was the exact type of daily minutiae she instinctively avoided sharing. In her experience, letters weren’t the place for that. They belonged at a friendly lunch, in a phone call, a one-off text, maybe jumbled into an email. She hadn’t quite mentally flipped around to thinking of phone conversations as being reserved for more special occasions than hand-written letters. “Sorry,” she apologized. She looked down at her hands while she thought up an excuse for the gaffe. “Ink wasn’t freely available growing up, so I was taught to conserve it for more formal use. I guess I never stopped.” She felt Weiss’s elbow jab gently at her arm. When she checked, he was looking at her out of the corner of his eye. “Alright. But next time write with something real.” “I’ve written about plenty of real things,” Tanya pointed out. “I meant...” he sighed. “I’m writing to you because I want to hear about you. Not about other things.” “Okay, okay,” she conceded. “I get it.” “Who ever thought the day would come I could teach you something?” he winked. Tanya kicked her feet up onto the dashboard. “Don’t get used to it.” Realistically, she knew her decision to accede to Weiss’s demand was rooted in irrationality. She gained nothing tangible from their relationship. Assuming they didn’t end up serving in another war, she likely never would again. He lived too far away to count as someone to rely on for daily needs, and he wasn’t exactly rubbing elbows with the rich and famous out there. Regardless, she wasn’t immune to plain old nostalgia. By the standards of her old life, she wasn’t sure she’d earned the indulgence. She was still in the beginnings of setting herself on the path of success, when how she chose to expend her effort was at a crucial stage. Given that she’d survived the first world war while a vengeful supernatural power tried to kill her in it, she judged it fair to reassess some minor technicalities. She wasn’t going to slack off so much that she started taking a lackadaisical attitude towards reaching her goals. The goal of the moment was to reaffirm her friendship with Weiss. She couldn’t afford to talk too much about herself. “How’s your job?” Tanya asked. “Same as ever,” Weiss shrugged. “I go in, I do some spells, tire myself out, I leave. You ever think about it?” The state of magical technology outside the military deserved to be a matter of national disgrace for every country on the planet. Humanity was still stuck in the dark ages of caring more about the lethal capacity of scientific advances than the economically productive ones. As such, there wasn’t much opportunity for magic work outside heavy industry, where brute force was key and companies were accustomed to large capital outlays, so didn’t balk at the cost of orbs. The pay wasn’t bad. She certainly wasn’t too good for factory work if it came down to putting food on the table. Ideally, it never would. She would remain free to pursue the type of knowledge work she most enjoyed. Getting stuck in a hot room with sweating colleagues and loud machinery doing the same handful of spells over and over again until she’d exhausted herself sounded a bit too akin to her wartime experience for her liking. The same went for the third option available exclusively to mages - research. With the military spearheading development, she didn’t foresee being the sole user of yet another Doomsday device working out particularly well for her life expectancy. In the end, she had to admit to herself there was also a petty, illogical complaint lurking in her mind about utilizing the magical skills she had to best serve her. Ultimately, she was looking to build a life that she could look back on with the satisfaction of owing not the slightest word of thanks to Being X. It would be a bit hard to do knowing that life was only possible because of the unscientific and unwanted “gift” he’d given her. Undoubtedly, he’d consider it proof positive that his messed up methodology for instilling faith was getting somewhere. Tanya shook her head to Weiss’s question. “Not really. I’m not sure it’s for me. You ever think about coming to the city?” “My family’s here,” he objected. He sank a bit into his seat. “All of them. If I have half as many children as my parents, I won’t be able to fit them anywhere but out here.” From his letters, Tanya had gathered that the Weiss clan was responsible for an unusually large percent of their country’s GDP. With families like his, the Empire wasn’t going to be headed for Japan’s negative population growth and deflationary cycle anytime soon. Too many names were thrown around for her to keep track of. “How many of you are there again?” “Oldest of twelve,” he said, scratching at the back of his head. “And you don’t want to know how many cousins I have. I don’t even know how many cousins I have.” “Then they probably won’t miss you if you’re gone,” Tanya joked. “Gee, thanks,” Weiss laughed. “That means a lot.” From Weiss’s happy face, she could deduce that her intention had gotten across. She’d not-so-subtly hinted that she’d like it if he lived in her general vicinity. That should clear up any reservations he had about her desire to keep in contact. Roughly an hour and a half after leaving the station, Tanya was taking in Weiss’s hometown. All three blocks of it. He took her to the lone inn - run by a branch of the family, if the last name on the sign was any indication - and told her to meet downstairs after dinner so she could be introduced to his brothers. With that, he left her to change out of her traveling clothes and get herself situated. Promptly at eight that evening, Tanya was perched in a seat at the bar, beer in hand. In the handful of hours in between, she’d already walked the town, done a hike, taken a bath, and unpacked all her luggage. At this rate, she’d run out of things to do by breakfast tomorrow. Hopefully, with the help of a little beer, she’d shortly be convincing Weiss that his car was beat up enough that she couldn’t do any real damage to it if he loaned it out for the purposes of adventuring. Tanya was a slow drinker. She’d finished her first round by the time the door swung open to reveal the four brothers of the Weiss family, two dark-haired, two blond. Evidently, the formerly-reliable major’s time-management skills were slipping. From what she gleaned, the sole inn also functioned as the sole bar, and her visitors were less there to see her than to escape an overcrowded home. With nine women preparing for a wedding, Tanya couldn’t blame them. That said, it was no excuse to cart along a middle schooler. “Just one beer, Edgar,” the older of the blonds said to the other. “One. Then you have to go back home.” “But Mom won’t notice,” the veritable child - who she was going to assume was Edgar - complained. “She’s busy.” “No, but Louise will. I’m not getting into a fight with her for you. I love you, but not that much.” “But she’ll make me curl ribbons with Elfriede,” Edgar stomped. “Not my fault you’re the youngest. One beer.” “How old is he?” Tanya mumbled under her breath, to the Weiss she knew familiarly by his family name. “Almost thirteen,” he grinned. “But trust me, what he’s getting served is a splash of beer into a cup of water. It just makes him easier to deal with if he doesn’t feel left out.” “That’s going to work out really well the first time he has a couple of real ones thinking he can handle them,” she commented. “I’m planning on it,” Weiss laughed, giving a thumbs up. “I’ll make sure I’m there on his sixteenth birthday to see him fall off the barstool. I’m thinking of making it a family tradition for my own sons.” Tanya rolled her eyes. “I’ll pray you only get daughters.” Right after the word came out of her mouth, she choked on her drink. The truth was, her life was going as well as could be reasonably expected. It made it difficult to maintain constant vigilance. “That’s mean,” Weiss pouted. “Especially since I think God actually listens to you.” Through her second round of inhaling beer into her lungs, Tanya glared at him for daring to suggest that Being X was a helpful presence in her life. “I mean, it’s not that there'd be anything wrong with having all girls,” Weiss backtracked. Tanya nodded, as of yet unable to speak. While that wasn’t the statement she’d taken issue with, there was no denying the prevalence of such preferences wasn’t problematic for her, now that she was a member of the nonpreferred class. “It’s just, I’d want someone who’d pass my name along,” Weiss kept rambling. “You know?” Tanya shook her head. “I don’t. I have no plans on perpetuating my own.” “I never really thought about that,” Weiss frowned. “It’s sad. You deserve a legacy more than most.” Tanya shrugged. “It’s just a name. It doesn’t really mean anything. If you woke up tomorrow with people calling you something different, it wouldn’t change who you were.” “It’s your connection to the past,” Weiss protested. Twenty years ago, she may have given that argument some weight. The hard left turn her life had taken made it a laughable notion. Her only connection with the past was holding onto the integrity of who she considered herself to be. “All I know about my parents is their names,” Tanya reminded Weiss. “Once you go back about forty years, I have no past to connect to.” “The future then,” he countered. “It’s your connection to the future.” Once again, in her days as a forgettable member of the corporate class, she might have given a moment’s consideration to whether that mattered. In this life, however, she’d put her stamp on history not long after her tenth birthday. Unfortunately, as a matter of public record her name was now more likely to be remembered for the post-war accusations the Republic had lobbed at her than as the girl forcing a smile on her face while she showed off her Silver Wings decoration. In retrospect, she could see why the Republic hadn’t had a chance of beating the Empire. Apparently, they thought that individual soldiers should be allowed to make decisions over whether they felt like killing anyone that day, and in which battles. From a legal perspective, the Imperial government had, as promised, had her back. From the perspective of straightening out what was fact and what was rumor in her record, not so much. Realistically, it was the best outcome she could have hoped for in the event of a loss. A government looking to distance itself from the prior regime had no incentive to publish the details about how badly they’d misused a child soldier, risking looking like they were praising her in the process. For the child soldier, earning instant credit with one part of the population for her long list of verified achievements wasn’t worth a target on her back from people who couldn’t understand that one mid-ranking officer following orders couldn’t actually be held responsible for turning the tide of international politics. Their neighbors had been itching to find an excuse to demonize the Empire and justify their punitive sanctions. In the immediate aftermath of the war, tempers had been running high and fingers had been pointing. Had her personal involvement in additional incidents that had offended the victors beyond your typical battles become well-known, significantly more of those fingers might have landed on her. “I’m not sure I’ll be remembered for the reasons I’d like,” she admitted. “But for better or worse, I think I’ve done enough to be recorded for posterity’s sake.” “That’s different,” Weiss objected. “That’s not a personal connection.” Tanya snorted. The unladylike conduct attracted the momentary attention of the bartender, which allowed her to request a third drink. “Politics is personal,” she laughed. “Whether I’d like it or not, as long as the war is more than a footnote in history, there’s guaranteed to be someone taking me personally.” “You’re impossible to argue with, you know,” Weiss muttered. “I can see why Lehrgen wanted to get you a bit muddled up. I think I’m on his side now.” “I’m not impossible to argue with,” she clarified. “Logic is what’s impossible to argue with.” She conveniently left out that in the end, Lehrgen had brought her around to wondering whether he didn’t have his own sort of rational basis for finding a small corner case of a flaw in her logic. She’d accede that she’d formulated her thoughts based on the rules of the private employment market, without considering some specifics unique to the military. Regardless, if she could take her boss back to her old world, they’d see who would be showing who the ropes. “Well, I know one thing I can beat you at,” Weiss smirked, head nodding to the billiards table his two next oldest brothers were playing a game at. “We’ll see,” she replied. “Edgar, time to go home,” Weiss declared, clapping his youngest brother on the back. “Have fun with those ribbons. Arthur, you haven’t beat Felix since I got home. Give it up and let us play.” The arrogance with which Weiss assumed victory in the game ended up being more confidence than the hubris Tanya had expected. As a collegiate, she’d taken up a passing interest in the sport as a way to pass time with a few friends. The interest had been resurrected two years into her working life, after she’d learned a company executive frequented one of Tokyo’s billiards halls. Luckily for her, billiards was a game where strategy counted for more than raw athletic talent. In her past life, she’d held herself back from wiping the floor with the seriously amateurish moves of her boss’s boss’s boss’s colleague. She hadn’t been aiming to inspire resentment. Only respect. Winning the occasional round had been part of her ploy, but she’d been careful not to let her wins tally up too high. The rules of the game were slightly different than she was familiar with. Nonetheless, the majority of Weiss’s instruction was unnecessary. In its basic form, she was playing the only sport she was proficient enough in not to make a fool of herself. Contrary to her expectations, that wasn’t enough to secure a win against any of the Weiss brothers. In spite of her superior strategic maneuvering, her precision in being able to strike one ball with another wasn’t where she expected it to be. Especially accounting for the fact that she had a sixth sense of a sort, in her ability to calculate vectors and trajectories between objects on the physical plane. She didn’t regret her resounding defeat as much as she otherwise might have. Going into the night, her primary objective had been to secure the usage of one of the family vehicles. Though, taking it as a pity offering didn’t feel quite so nice as taking it as a spoils of victory would have. Any qualms her ego presented on that front she deemed illogical. Now that he was trapped by wedding minutiae, Weiss was more than happy to admit he had little need for a car old enough to suffer a bit of abuse from Tanya’s barely-trained hands. Far be it from her to object to his generosity on the grounds of personal pride. 
 May 21, 1931Alerthausen, Vittgensteinerland, Imperial Province of Westfalien
 “Matze,” came a call from the kitchen. After a nearly-nonexistent honeymoon - they were saving their money, and besides, the whole town could put two and two together and figure out it hadn’t been their first night together - Matheus Weiss was at home for a final sendoff from his family. There were precisely three people that called him by that nickname. His mother, his eldest sister, and his new wife. And he’d know his mother’s voice anywhere. “Be a dear and tell Tanya to be here to make jam tomorrow,” she instructed, once he’d entered the room. “Or else Louise will have to do it.” Louise responded with a solid thunk of her cleaver going straight through bone to strike the wood underneath. The goose for tonight’s dinner was receiving all her enthusiasm for playing the part of the family’s enforcer. It was dead and you still had to feel bad for it. She looked like she wanted to decorate her wall with the spine she’d pulled out. “She’s not like other women,” Matheus interjected, wincing along to the crack of the goose’s breastbone as Louise pushed her weight onto it. “She doesn’t really cook.” “Oh, but she said she loved the jam you sent last year,” his mother smiled. “It’s so sad to hear a girl say she’ll never make anything that tasty.” “Mom, you didn’t even want to let me invite her,” he reminded the old lady, sticking a finger in the filling she was making for a pie. She batted his hand away. “She sounded very different in the letters you used to write.” Matheus rolled his eyes. Most of his letters home had been perfectly complimentary of his superior officer. Those first few hadn’t. His mother’d had a protective chip on her shoulder ever since. “She deserves a chance,” she went on. “She could be agreeable with the right instruction.” “A chance at what?” he laughed. “She’s doing fine for herself.” “What Mom means,” Louise cut in, huffing a bit as she slid her pan into the oven, “is that your little friend can’t tie neat bows, can’t style her own hair, ate as much food as half the men, had more opinions than all of them, and apparently can’t cook worth a damn. She’ll end up an old maid before she knows it.” “Well, I wouldn’t have put it that way,” their mother snapped, before he had a chance to object that his little friend was capable of far more difficult things than arranging a marriage for herself, should she want one. For now, from the sounds of it, it was work giving her butterflies in her stomach, if anything. “Honestly, Mom, after I turned twenty-five, do you have any idea how many times you hinted that if I didn’t get married soon, I was never going to?” A laugh escaped Matheus’s throat. He stifled it as soon as both women paused their spat to glare at the interruption. It had been funny, in his defense. Coming home to find his quick-tempered, sour-puss of a sister happily married. “I was only trying to help,” their mother sulked. “And you know you’ve only stopped pestering me about grandchildren since he’s got one coming,” Louise said, her knife jabbing angrily in Matheus’s general direction. “You’re almost thirty, Louise. You aren’t getting any younger.” “Anyway,” Louise sighed, shooting their mother a final look of exasperation. “Unless the only man’s opinion that girl cares about is her boss’s, she needs to start learning all this sometime. And there’s a lot of women here to help. Although, I’m not sure how much help someone could need to make jam. It’s three ingredients.” “You guys,” Matheus smiled, reaching to wrap his arms around his sister and pick her up off the floor, one eye kept out for the knife. If it weren’t for Louise’s argumentative nature, he might have forgotten. Six months ago, he would’ve told them Tanya was cut from a different cloth. Six months ago, he hadn’t felt his heart break for her. To think she’d had feelings like that for Vooren and had been so bad at expressing them that no one knew. Not even Visha. In the end, she wasn’t that different from his sister Annemarie. Only a year older, and much scarier when she was mad. “Stop hugging me,” Louise griped. “I’m only doing it so Mom can bother herself over someone else’s life for a day.” xXx Charité Hospital, with its dark and foreboding doors, sent apprehensive shivers down Erich von Lehrgen’s spine, the black stain of the wood a stark reminder that people died inside. So far as he knew, the last Mr. von Lehrgen to come through those doors had been his father. For starters, the last vestige of his youth would be one casualty. The person - whoever he was - he became when he left behind class, creed, and calling to spend time with a woman who shared none of those with him might become another. Elise was on the other side of those doors in her uniform, he was in his, and for now they couldn’t remove them, literally or figuratively. Both of their jobs were rewarding. Neither was easy. Their relationship, such that it was, was all the easier for the fact they’d silently agreed not to begrudge the other their long hours in return for their time together remaining unpolluted by how they’d spent those hours. The inside wasn’t so grim as the entrance implied. The hall, with its cracked plaster and old water stains, provided a familiar comfort after the constant flow of cars down the same street where he’d seen his first motorized ambulance on a visit to some old relative or other. At age seven, that had seemed more important than determining how he was related to whoever was dying. He’d become sentimental with age. He wished he could go back and preserve their memory for another generation, or apologize for not caring back then. The receptionist could be the same woman who’d greeted his family years past. Youthful but not young, well-fed but not portly, hair that wasn’t blonde but not dark enough to be called brown, smiling but not too cheerfully, she sat in the same seat that countless others of that description had occupied, passed seamlessly from mother to surrogate daughter. “What can I do for you, sir?” she asked. He would swear in that moment he was his father. Same age, same once-rich brown hair fading from lack of sun that might make the eventual grays an improvement, same question, same woman asking it. “Looking for a patient,” he replied, playing out the scene in his memory another step. The illusion broke when the receptionist pushed a leatherbound book in his direction. “Put your name down here,” she instructed, a formality that hadn’t existed thirty years ago. “And give me his name.” “Her, actually,” he corrected. “Serebryakov. Viktoriya Serebryakov. Should be in long-term recuperation.” I know her,” the receptionist nodded. Her thumb came up to swipe along her tongue and then went down below the counter to separate one file from another, her eyes never leaving her work. He was a distraction - transitory, irrelevant, one of a thousand. “I think we’ll all be sad to lose her when she leaves.” Done signing his name, he pushed the guestbook away across an expanse of worn wood. The smile he gave in response was one she wouldn’t see. She reached for the book without looking up. “Well then, Mr. - oh.” She paused. On the next beat, her gaze finally broke away from her desk to assess him. “You’re the one Elise talks about sometimes, aren’t you?” All the concentration she’d given to sorting her files narrowed to scrutinize him. His eyes wandered away, landing on the other visitors waiting. Lost in their newspapers, their whispered conversations, their dreams, for the ones sleeping, none of them paid him any attention back. He cleared his throat to address himself to the receptionist once more. There was no particular reason people couldn’t know. There was no particular reason they should. “Is everyone going to recognize my name like that?” The receptionist tilted her head to the side, tired brown eyes drawing into a squint. “Nurses, yes. Doctors, probably none. Want me to find her too?” “Ahh, no,” he coughed. His time with Elise had always been an escape. First on the Western front, when they’d found the same spots to have a cigarette somewhere you couldn’t see or hear anyone dying and could pretend it wasn’t happening. Now from the burden of having survived to deal with the rest of life. For both of them, he’d like to keep Erich with no further description, a man with no past, no future, and no present besides what was in front of him, alive a little longer. He shook his head so hastily he felt compelled to explain. “I can’t be away from work too long. And I’m sure she’s busy with more important things.” Besides, while Viktoriya had never struck him as a gossip in the truest sense of the word, Tanya visited every Wednesday. Once a week, precisely at 5:30, she appeared at the door she used to slink past before their chat. A goodbye wave and happy smile greeted him, unnecessarily impressed with herself for proving she could meet the easiest request he’d ever given a subordinate. He was too. Next week, Tanya would come and would learn her boss had one of the nurses along when he visited, and not for professional reasons. If she was curious, Viktoriya could call Elise in. They could find out about everything he’d never want to tell a coworker. Tanya least of all. Elise didn’t care so much about those things. Or, next week, Tanya would hear nothing about it, because Elise hadn’t come to meet him. “She won’t be too busy to play chaperone,” the receptionist said, soft voice tinkling with laughter. “I was the one that cleared the order that injured Serebryakov,” he admitted. “All I want is a chance to make amends in person without anything else in the way.” The lie twinged at his conscience. Your orders were always going to hurt someone. You couldn’t say sorry to them all. Maybe this time he’d make an exception. For honesty’s sake, if nothing else. “Through that door, second left, eighth door on your right,” the receptionist instructed. As the sound of his footsteps echoed in the hall, he memorized the route Tanya walked every Wednesday for next time. He’d thought about walking it with her. More than once. There was little point to trying with her - trying at life generally, maybe - if he didn’t affirm she was capable of being someone other than the person she’d shown them for all those years. Earlier that morning, he’d tried to get through to ask her a question. A woman, stern like Marian and several times angrier, had ordered him to wait. Tanya hadn’t tried the nectar out of a honeysuckle before; rectifying the oversight took priority. Were it not for his magic, Weiss’s sister might’ve had a better career in the Army than he had. For as much as Erich wanted to see Tanya be a good friend, or a good sport when everyone was having fun, he never wanted to forget she was other things, too. When he reached the eighth door on the right, he knocked twice. There was no response. He did it again, then poked his head in to see if she was asleep. Instead, Viktoriya was engrossed in finishing a braid, long blonde hair exchanging between fingers while she hummed a tune to herself he didn’t recognize. “Hey - umm - hey,” he said, knocking once more for effect. “Serebryakov.” Simultaneously, her hands dropped to her lap to grip her blanket, and her back snapped upright. The moment before she recognized him was brief, but not enough to hide the obvious. A part of her hadn’t got the message that she was home and safe. “Sir!” she chimed out with good cheer, after she’d shaken herself out of it. “I was wondering when I’d see you again.” “Sorry,” he ducked his head. “I should’ve come earlier. I’ve got no good excuse. And sorry I was the one that ended up putting you here.” “It could’ve been any other order that did it, sir,” she said, with a shake of her head. “It was bad luck.” “I know, just - anyway. Erich is fine. And before I forget, since I’m already about three months late…” He let his sentence drift off while he fished a pack of cards out of his pocket, hand painted and signed by one of the city’s more creative artists. “It isn’t much, but happy birthday.” The room he stepped into to hand them to her was decorated haphazardly, a stark contrast to the soulless institutional intentionality of hospital décor. Posters torn from magazines were tacked to the walls, not all of them hung straight. A handwoven blanket of blues and yellows rested on the seat of a chair. A forgotten bouquet of irises languished by the window. The beam of sunlight shooting through it illuminated the upward swirl and downward dance of dust motes that temporary-stay rooms never had the chance to collect. “They’re beautiful,” Viktoriya smiled, thumbing through the artwork. “Thank you.” “It’s really Elya you should be thanking,” he admitted. “What else did you get?” “About a million things from her,” Viktoriya chuckled. With her chin, she gestured to the far corner of the room. “My aunt knit me a better blanket.” She leaned down to grope around under the bed and came up with a textbook. “You’ll never guess who this one’s from.” The title alone was enough it might put the average person to sleep. The book’s length made him think even he would succumb to the same fate several times before he finished. It was the medical compendium on magical healing. Current edition. Probably the most expensive of Viktoriya’s gifts, certainly the most practical. So much so it negated the sentimentality of gift-giving. A ribbon taken off a package of chocolates and given to Viktoriya to tie her hair back would've made a better present. He was immensely proud of Tanya. She’d spared a moment to think about what kind of gift she’d want herself, and another moment to give that same consideration to someone else. A far cry from the girl who’d hurt anyone, anytime, as long as she wouldn’t get in trouble over it. There was little doubt in his mind that Viktoriya agreed. She lifted the heavy brown tome proudly in the air, smiling next to embossed gold lettering glinting in the light. “It’s the thought that counts,” she said warmly. “And it is very interesting. You just...really have to be in the right mood to read it.” “And the flowers?” he asked, nodding at the decaying bunch on the windowsill. “Elya brings them whenever she comes.” “I’m guessing Degurechaff doesn’t replace them.” Viktoriya giggled into a hand. “She has you doing it too, I see.” While he racked his brain for what she could possibly mean by that, Erich picked the crumpled blanket off the chair, folded it once, a second time, a third, shaking invisible dust out as he went. Without asking - Viktoriya was still half a soldier to him, he a superior officer with every right to inspect her personal effects - he opened the small closet next to him to find a place for it. Now that the chair was free of its previous occupant, he pulled it over nearer to her and dropped into it, old springs creaking underneath. “Doing what?” he asked. “Sticking with last names.” “Oh, she did not like it when I accidentally switched one time,” he laughed. “You might be alright. She likes you better.” At the compliment, Viktoriya’s eyes fluttered downward demurely. “That’s not true,” she denied. “She always has plenty of good things to say about you. Just before she left she couldn’t stop talking about you putting her in charge of managing personnel on a new project, no matter how hard she tried to keep quiet over it.” The battle to keep a genuine smile off his face was one he ceded graciously to the image of Tanya energetically obsessed with plain old officework. “That’s good to hear,” he nodded. “She seemed like she enjoyed it the one time she did something similar. I was worried it was a fluke.” “I’m not sure if it matters how much she likes the assignment itself,” Viktoriya said, pursing her lips in a bit of a frown. “You trust her to do things no one else thinks she’s capable of. It’s a nice feeling. I’d know.” The battle to keep a grimace off his face was the one he fought in earnest. Trust was a fraught word when it came to Tanya. Bit by bit, he’d let enough of the truth out that she was aware they disagreed on points of policy. What she didn’t know, maybe never could, was how far he was willing to go to win. Winning against someone who bought their friends stupid birthday presents and licked honeysuckles every spring didn’t bring the satisfaction he used to get. It was the reminder that no amount of presents made up for another world war that anchored him to a lifetime of lessons that what he wanted to do, in the end, was less important than what it was his duty to do. “You didn’t feel up to going to the wedding?” he asked, switching them off the subject. “Maybe I could’ve,” Viktoriya sighed. “If I’d really wanted to. I did really want to. But I’d need help, and everyone would feel like they have to keep an eye out, and I was afraid I’d turn it into an event focused on me instead.” “I’m not sure how you survived it all with that attitude intact,” he commented. “Especially knowing you were with Degurechaff most of the time.” Viktoriya’s eyes went to her lap again, this time in a flash, not a flutter. They raised back up above an uncertain grin while her shoulders rolled into a shrug and her head tilted to the side, as though she didn’t know the answer herself. “How is she?” he continued. “Tanya. Do you have any sense of how she’s doing? Personally?” “Alright, I think.” Viktoriya looked down at her hands and twiddled her thumbs a few times. “She seems happy, but not...settled, or something. Like she can’t just enjoy being here. That’s the best way I can put it.” “I can see that,” Erich agreed, wishing she’d said anything else. It was that same observation that gave him constant doubts over if he was starting to see what he wanted in Tanya, not what was really there. “She doesn’t complain about much,” Viktoriya added. “If she wants advice she’ll ask. Other than that she doesn’t talk about her problems for the sake of it. I can’t tell if that’s because she doesn’t have them, or what.” Somewhere beneath his ribs, the prick of a poisonous thought struck, paralytic and painful as a snakebite. “Do you think we made her like that?” he asked. “Spending so much time around gruff old men?” Viktoriya fiddled with the end of her braid while she considered his question. “I don’t think it helped,” she cautioned. “But I think she’s always had that part of her. She’s practical about everything. Not just this.” The tight feeling in his lungs dissipated. “I think we’d both like to see to it she doesn’t remain stuck on who she used to be,” he began, waiting for a nod before he continued. “So I did have a favor to ask.” Working for the General Staff made it easy for Tanya to maintain a hawk’s precise concentration on a target too far away for other eyes to see. Some days, it demanded it. It was why the hints that her focus was broadening beyond its old horizons remained just that - hints. Her time spent with Viktoriya didn’t impose the same myopia. “I’m not so positive where she sees her future heading, anymore,” he explained. “I’m her boss. I’m afraid if I ask she’ll only think about a future in the Army. Talking with you, she might consider more options.” “Well, I’ll try,” Viktoriya promised, frowning slightly. “But I don’t think she likes talking about herself that much.” A sincere thank you later, he was back in the hall, back to waving at the receptionist, back past dark doors, and back under a summer sun hot enough to make him pull at his collar. Taking the long way to the office, his thoughts turned to two more personal to-dos he could check off his list by the end of the day, so long as it remained slow. He owed his brother a letter that didn’t forget to acknowledge his nephew’s birthday. And he was behind on sending one down to Ildoa demanding his friend there explain what madness was sweeping through the country faster than a plague. xXx For the week after returning from vacation, Tanya had plenty to talk about with Visha. She wasn’t entirely sure how she felt about using her deep analytical skills to peel apart every nuance of the extended Weiss family, but Visha had seemed to consider it a necessary exercise. She’d pulled everything out, from Tanya’s proudest moment - a resounding defeat of all Weiss family members in billiards after nightly practice at getting her aim right - to her most embarrassing. Cooking wasn’t a skill she took any particular pride in. For nearly forty years, any knowledge above and beyond following directions on the back of a convenience store package had been wasted on her. She’d had more than enough disposable income to pay for takeout when she wanted variety. In this life, she’d improved somewhat upon her limited repertoire. Making a good salad required nothing besides some chopping and a basic idea of what vegetables you liked to eat raw. Finding rice hadn’t been hard. Learning to make it properly had involved the sacrifice of one pot. That was a year in the past. She was practically a professional at it now. Cooking meat wasn’t terribly difficult. As long as she cut it up in pieces and turned it over frequently so it didn’t burn, it was quick, and easy to tell when she’d reached the point she wasn’t going to give herself food poisoning. She’d be the first to admit her meals weren’t that exciting. Healthy and well-rounded counted for more. To that end, once she’d been roped into making her own jam with the women of the Weiss family - courtesy of his oldest sister misinterpreting everything Tanya said to sound like she was calling herself too good for making her own food like country bumpkins - she’d been immediately circumspect of the amount of sugar they were pouring in. The proportions seemed to be more sugar than fruit, in fact. As she had no objection to the natural taste of strawberries and no desire for a mouthful of cavities, she’d taken the obvious route: adding less. Apparently, the sugar did more than sweeten it. Batch one, salvaged, barely, by a late-game assist from the star player in the kitchen. Similarly, after suffering sticky fingers in round one, she’d opted to squeeze her lemon wedges into the mix instead of throwing them in wholesale and picking them out later, figuring it would achieve the same taste. Yet again, she’d soon discovered it had nothing to do with flavor. Another faulty product had been added to her tally. Next came undercooking. Then overcooking. After that, she’d been assigned dishes while everyone else finished up. Against the odds, her work had turned out perfectly edible, if not up to the usual standards of taste and consistency. In spite of her dictatorial management style, Weiss’s oldest sister was a reasonable woman, who’d wanted to make up for the fact that the successive failures were mostly a result of unclear or missing instructions. After quietly ascertaining that Tanya had someone she couldn’t afford to give an unpresentable souvenir to, his sister had approached with an offer to swap some of their jars. In her own words, Tanya had deserved them more, because the other woman’s husband was going to eat whatever she put in front of him, and like it. Since it was to her own benefit, she’d decided she could overlook the flagrant violation of the man in question’s personal freedoms. Tanya had managed to leave Visha innocent of the part where the closest sister in age to her had spent two hours giving her relationship advice. She could grudgingly acknowledge that the girl had been trying to help. That hadn’t made her want to listen. Whoever came up with the phrase about the thought counting must have never received an unwelcome gift in their life. By now, she’d succeeded in blocking the experience from her memory so it didn’t take up valuable space. Naturally, she’d wanted to keep the five best jars to herself, if possible. She didn’t begrudge one for Visha as a way of keeping her spirits up after hearing what she missed out on. From the get-go, she’d mentally penciled in giving one to Lehrgen, excited to see his reaction to some hard evidence that she knew how to take it easy. The success of that gesture had been slightly marred by his on-the-nose guess that the handmade confection hadn’t necessarily been made by her own hands. It was more than a bit shameful being caught trying to pass off someone else’s work as your own. Tanya had begun her evening with Visha by asking a follow-up question on how she’d like the Weiss family recipe. Lacking Elya’s talent for thoughtless gossip, in the aftermath of the positive response, she’d taken a pause to reflect on what would make for good conversation. Her hesitation had provided Visha with the space to start in on a subject she normally avoided: Tanya’s personal life. There was nothing in particular she cared about hiding, aside from the obvious. The truth was, she just wasn’t up to the task of making it out to be something worthy of carrying a conversation. She spent most of her time working. The rest was filled with mundane tasks, or on Visha herself. She had no family to speak of. The people she was close with were either coworkers, people she and Visha knew in common, or a nun. She was now one of the most boring people she knew, and she aimed to keep it that way. “It doesn’t have to be anything big,” Visha said, after a few rounds of denial. “I don’t think I’m the only one who’s curious how you’ve adjusted to civilian life, living on your own, that sort of thing.” Tanya raised an eyebrow. Visha gave a few hums of hesitation. “Colonel von Lehrgen came by when you were out,” she confessed. “Your name came up. Obviously. I’m sure he’d like to hear your life is alright outside work, too.” “He’s General von-,” “You know who I mean.” Like usual on social niceties, Visha was right. His rank wasn’t the only thing wrong with her sentence. It was no mystery to him that Tanya went to the hospital after work every Wednesday. She made sure he was aware that she left the office in a timely fashion when she had other business to attend to. What was a mystery was why Lehrgen wouldn’t have accompanied her if all he wanted was a social call. He’d specifically waited until she was away. Did Mr. Commitment Issues already have his eyes on what was next? “It wasn’t anything serious,” Visha deflected. “He was just being nice.” Tanya crossed her arms. “I hope that’s true.” As a general rule, she didn’t take much interest in anyone’s dating life. Up to and including her own. Not when there were more important things at stake, like her career, which was over as soon as she was dragged into the middle of a lover’s spat between her closest friend and her boss. Opposites might attract. But they had serious issues with long-term compatibility. Prima facie, Visha could do worse. That didn’t mean Tanya was going to sit back and watch as a productive coworker got permanently removed from the employment market. The whole idea was giving her a headache. She’d introduced the two of them. Now she was the one that might get boxed out of the relationship. “Well, anyway,” Visha said, clapping her hands together. “You still haven’t answered my question about how you’re really doing after your career as an officer got interrupted. You used to be so focused on it.” “I’m the same as ever, Serebryakov,” Tanya sighed, then smiled. Visha was too generous, asking after other people when she was the one in the hospital bed. And perceptive. Mostly, Tanya had been content to allow her subordinates to believe she was fighting because she cared about the Empire, not the future of her career. “Civilian life agrees with me like you wouldn’t believe,” she continued, with a sniff of laughter. “I’ve only had to change my course, not my destination. Don’t worry about me. I wouldn’t let God himself get in my way. Focus on getting better.” In the meantime, Tanya would focus on making sure she put a stop to Elya’s Life of Erich von Lehrgen Hour once and for all. There was no reason Visha needed to spend that much time thinking about it. 
 June 19, 1931Bolshoy Ustinsky Bridge, Moskva, Russy Federation
 Mikel Tukhachevsky took his eyes off watching the river below him to deliver a brisk slap to his right hand with his left, smiling around a cigarette when he saw a spot of blood, bright red and splayed out in rays from the center, after he lifted it. The mosquitoes weren’t bad yet, and he was already fed up with them. He was fed up with the stink of industry hanging in the warm air. He was fed up with seeing the color red. He was fed up with the sound of parades, of propaganda, of politicians he didn’t agree with. Especially ones standing on the other side of the lamppost muttering to themselves about things they’d be dragged in front of a firing squad for saying. Mikel didn’t want to report him. But if he didn’t, and someone else heard, they were both heading for the firing squad. All for standing on a bridge trying to mind his own damn business. Mikel was a survivor. He’d survived being on the wrong side of the Revolution. Survived Sildberia, survived a world war, survived disobeying Loria’s orders because there hadn’t been enough time to execute him before Loria and his loyalists were executed themselves. He wasn’t going to die for standing on a bridge trying to mind his own damn business. He cleared his throat and leaned out over the bridge’s balustrade, far enough to see around the lamppost. “Comrade,” he warned. A head stuck out from the other side. Portly, deep-jowled, red-cheeked, mop of thinning blond hair going every which way despite no wind. “Piatokov. It’s Piatokov. I’m nobody’s comrade. They’ve disgraced the name.” Mikel cleared his throat again. “Comrade,” he warned a second time, putting more emphasis into his tone. “Let them kill me,” Piatokov bemoaned. “I thought I could work with them. I’m on some committees. But death is better than living to see how else we’ll pervert the name of communism.” Mikel rolled his eyes. One of those. So far as he could tell, there were about ten different types of communists all claiming to represent true communism, mostly all more interested in killing each other than dismantling global capital to free the worker, or whatever it was they were supposed to be doing. It was a bit like religion that way. He wished it hadn’t been too dangerous to hang around talking with that Rus girl he’d found among the Imperials. Tsarists had to stick together. At least he’d done a final good deed for his rightful rulers. “They really will kill you for saying that, you know,” he mouthed around his cigarette. “Won’t be any good to your cause then.” “I’d become a martyr,” Piatokov declared, making a fist of determination so Mikel could see. Mikel leaned back to see him from the other side of the lamppost, head to toe. Still didn’t recognize him. He raised an eyebrow. “You important enough for that?” “...no,” Piatokov admitted, chin dropping towards his chest. “Probably why they haven’t killed you yet.” “Probably.” “You can’t fight the Kremlin all alone,” Mikel said. “Only way to change it is to be the next man in charge. Or sufficiently close.” “Is that a suggestion?” “Just an observation.” “Why are you helping me?” Mikel gave a hushed laugh. Like he knew. Piatokov’s sect was probably as bad as all the others. All he knew was whatever his misguided beliefs, Piatokov seemed the type who wanted to be a good man. If Comrade Josef had ever cared about that, it was a long time ago. In the years since the war, his leader had been magnanimous with the formerly-outcast mages. He’d shake their hands, provided there wasn’t an orb anywhere nearby. He’d built a place for their families so the common people with their prejudices wouldn’t bother them. He’d secured it. Tightly. Ever the perceptive man, he’d made sure to protect them from that most insidious of threats - the internal enemy. There must have been a lot of them. Mostly, the guns were turned to point at the compound. When Mikel and his men toasted the government, they all knew what it meant when he encouraged them to never forget how the Party had treated them. One day, the memory of the war would fade some, and with it the memory of the mages who’d turned it around for a win. Mikel was a survivor. He could go back to the cold of Sildberia, and it had been a long time since he’d feared a cold grave. His children? His little grandchildren? Maybe they were survivors too. He hoped they never had to find out. He took a final puff, then threw his cigarette into the river. With a clap on the shoulder, he said goodbye to Piatokov, turning to look behind him to give an answer to why he was saving the life of a man he didn’t know, or agree with. “Because I can’t mind my own damn business.” 




 

 Son, can you play me a memory?






 
 "The basis of optimism is sheer terror"
 
 June 28, 1931Lichterfeld, Imperial Capital Berun
 The gentle, early-summer breeze ruffled the pages of the letter Erich von Lehrgen was reading, floating by as it passed through the window he’d thrown open earlier, through its protests and groans at him for breaking eight months of dormancy, his study the one place in the house he sealed off from noise until the heat became a worse distraction He turned his back to the window for long enough to learn the neighborhood Garden Club had taken him up on the only suggestion he’d ever give them. The letter ended in the wastebin along with countless other papers before he finished reading all about the fun he’d have once he became a member. Marian was right. He did need more hobbies. He’d become content with the fact his work followed him home most nights and gave him something to do. He’d be damned if he was going to start letting meetings do the same. Feet drifting towards his desk, too large, too ornate, like all his furniture, he picked up his final piece of unopened mail. Heavy and thick, the expensive cardstock of the envelope delighted the fingers roaming across it to touch a stamp that was the first of its kind to reach him. Printed in both Ildoan and Françoise, the blue-gray sticker declaring Par Avion announced more about the letter’s point of origin than the words implied. Airmail was no longer restricted to the world’s most advanced countries. Or, Ildoa had joined their ranks. The round marks rubber-stamped in black ink, surrounding and carefully avoiding the destination address - H. Erich von Lehrgen, Kommandantenstraße 86, Berun - told a story in miniature. One from Neapolis, that let him know it had been written and posted from his friend’s private home. Another from Ruma, Posta Aerea spelled out across the bottom. A third from Berun, on its way to be resorted into domestic mail. The silver letter-opener embossed with his initials that he lifted from the top end of his desk was the first thing he’d bought himself when he’d received his assignment after graduating War College. A decoration to add to his new space, but a practical one. He’d been proud of the position, the prestige, the trust his country was placing in him to select the next generation of officers. He hadn’t minded going straight from a student’s desk to one in an office, not exactly. Back then, what he had minded was that it could mean he’d spend the rest of his career there. Not a real soldier, as he’d put it to Marian and Otto over drinks after finding out. She had smacked him across the back of the head for thinking that was better. His brother had only laughed. Personnel, he’d joked. Just what I was hoping for. You can go destroy my file so the Army forgets I exist. The days he was feeling religious, he thanked God for it. He’d been a mere major when the war started. Would probably be in the ground with millions of other real soldiers instead of wondering if humanity had fought its final war meant for real soldiers - honorable, triumphant, glorious - before his time. There had been no honor, no triumph, no glory in their war. Nothing but cruel necessities and soulless devotion to dutiful destruction. Somehow or another, the letter-opener had found its way from his desk at work to the one at home. After the Eastern front had opened up, he thought. That was when the office had started filling up beyond capacity. Good supplies had been in such high demand that break-of-dawn auctions where long-time General Staff officers enriched themselves at the expense of temporary placements hadn’t been a rare sight. Eventually, it had devolved into a ruthless, informal game of Steal or Be Stolen From. Steal and Be Stolen From, often. The morning he’d arrived to find his cushioned chair gone, a rickety wooden one in its place, he’d packed up everything he cared to lose. The letter-opener must have come home then. He slid it into the gap in the side as carefully as he could. With a quick jerk, the halves of the envelope cleanly separated from each other, just like he’d hoped, preserving the bit of memorabilia as neatly as a museum piece. He drew the letter out, let it fall to his desk for now. Before he forgot, he wanted to stick the envelope somewhere it wouldn’t be accidentally thrown out. It was the first piece of mail that had flown to reach him personally, not the man who occupied the position of Deputy Director of Operations. That man told him it would do nothing but take up space. He’d never look at it again. Erich only had to listen to him on weekdays. There was a drawer in his desk assigned to collect the assorted variety of papers and small memorabilia he couldn’t get rid of, some for good reason, some for reasons he couldn’t explain. He pulled it open and nestled the envelope in with a smile. It was one of the lucky ones. Most papers he’d saved over the last few years hadn’t made it to the officially-designated Drawer of Unsorted Things he’d get around to filing when he had the time. They were stashed wherever was convenient in the room he’d been reading them in - on one side of the piano bench in the salon, on a bookshelf in his small nook of a library the architect had just barely fit in, underneath a chest in the living room, next to the cake server in the dining room’s buffet, on the top shelf of a kitchen cabinet, resting on the bottom shelf of his nightstand. Half a second after closing it, fingers still grasping the handle, he jerked the drawer back open, wincing at the sound of the cabinet hardware clacking against the abrupt force with which he’d pulled. For years, whenever he had time had resided in a distant, unreachable future. It didn’t anymore. He had the time. Had had the time for a couple months. There was no pretending his old excuse was anything but a cover for I don’t feel like it. With Sunday barely begun, most families still at church, the hours stretched out in front of him. Gathering up the piles from each hiding spot took almost no time. He got them to the uppermost level in two trips, precariously tottering stacks weighing down his arms. Dust billowed down in a stormcloud from the attic when he unfolded the stairs, coating everything - him, his papers, the floor, picture frames hanging in the hall - with a thin layer in its wake. Categorizing what he’d accumulated swallowed the remainder of the morning whole, then ate away at the early afternoon. Postcards were stuffed into the old cigar boxes of his father’s cousin that Aunt Irma hadn’t been able to let go of when he died. Trinkets picked up traveling went into a steamer trunk that would never leave the house. There was a small box for what he called his Book of Firsts. First piece of airmail, first ticket to a movie, first passport, issued by a country that no longer existed. First set of ration coupons. One day, he’d be glad he saved them, for the same reason he’d been fascinated at seeing his grandfather’s first electric bill. Even if it was only him, old and infirm and reminiscing about the way things used to be. Letters he saved in their own chest. If there came a point when he filled it, he’d go through and determine what, exactly, he cared to keep, and what he’d rather sacrifice for the sake of future missives. For now, there was plenty of room at the top. A few items belonged in the safe. Things that had deserved better treatment than being lumped in with random items of sentimental value and left to rot until he made time for them. Medals he didn’t wear on his uniform. The death certificates and notarized agreement that made him the legal owner of his home. The combination was easy to remember - 89-4-21-93 - the birth days and years of he and Otto, one forward, one in reverse. The papers he laid neatly on the top shelf among others of their kind. His birth certificate, diplomas, insurance agreements, copies of his enlistment forms, both original and current. His medals went in a steel box with everything else valuable that wasn’t his half of the inherited jewelry. That sat in the black velvet bag he lifted off the top, surprised for the umpteenth time how heavy it was. He’d expected by now that at least some of it would be in use, laying carelessly on a dresser for him to complain about. In ten years, if it was still up there, he’d solidify his spot as his niece’s favorite uncle and gift it to her. He dusted off, climbed down the stairs, folded them back up, dusted off again, listening to his clock chime two as he finished. His lunch was a few handfuls of blueberries and a couple slices off a block of cheese, nothing that would ruin his appetite and thus his dinner plans. He picked up Domenico’s long-forgotten letter off his desk while he polished off the last of his snack. His house was too big for one person. Friends mentioned it all the time. He denied it out loud. He knew it was true. Another home could be cheaper and easier to maintain, closer to work, better for socializing, styled more to his taste. It was things like being able to roam through hundreds of square meters with personal history attached while he read his letters or argued with himself in his head that he couldn’t give up. The red curtains that had once caught fire from a hot ember sparked certain types of thoughts; the wall his aunt had painted in two hundred shades of yellow before she committed to one brought others. He knew where to go when he wanted quiet or background noise, to be warm and drowsy or have a draft keeping him on alert. Smaller homes had no hope of containing so many diverse personalities. The letter he read while he traipsed through them all made repeated assurances that the Empire had nothing to fear from Ildoa, nor from Signore Berluscone’s meteoric rise in popularity. Domenico knew the man, which somehow came as no surprise to Lehrgen. Perhaps it was bad of him to assume greedy Ildoan politicians of all parties got drinks together when no one was watching. When he was proven wrong, he’d revise it. According to Domenico, Silvio was but a typical energetic Ildoan full of typical political bluster. He was investing himself in rebuilding his country. That required the electoral support of people who fantasized about rebuilding the Ruman Empire. Silvio, and some corrupt-sounding contract one of his businesses had with the postal service, was the reason Ildoans could now send airmail. The man had bankrolled the upfront cost in return for a cut of the fees. That was all well and good, except Lehrgen knew too well that civilian aircraft made for a halfway-trained air force. It was how his own country was trying to keep current. Mostly, what he gathered from the letter was that Signore Berluscone was both rich and shrewd enough to pay for Domenico’s friendship. That was a lever that could be turned against him, if need be. Catching sight of himself in a mirror as he passed through the parlor, more immediate concerns pushed away Erich’s worries over a country that didn’t border his own any longer. His customary Sunday-evening shave would need to come before he went out for dinner, not after. Once the sink was full of hot water, his dusty shirt tossed in the laundry bin, and his face rinsed clean, he took out the brush soaking in an old teacup to swirl it through soap and then whip it into a lather, like egg whites into meringue. Twenty years ago, he’d made Franciszka Nowak laugh when he made that comparison while she showed him the trick to the edible version. As he raised the brush to his face, his lips quirked into a satisfied smile. The definition was finally visible in the muscles that wrapped around his arms once again. Even fresh out of his most rigorous weeks of training, he’d never fooled himself into thinking he’d be featured on the posters showing what the ideal Imperial soldier looked like. That hadn’t made it all so much easier when he’d noticed last summer that full-time office work wasn’t treating him as well as he’d thought. In spite of the punishing hours, the years at war he’d spent constantly on the move, and constantly surrounded by soldiers eager to prove themselves. The impromptu athletic contests or morning exercises had been unavoidable. Without a commanding officer looking over his shoulder, forming a dedicated routine had taken half a year. It had to fit around his work schedule. Had to be ambitious enough to cram a worthwhile amount of exercise into a short time. Couldn’t be so ambitious he looked for any excuse to avoid it. Trial and error had eventually gotten him there. Done brushing the lather on, his right hand hesitated for a moment, then grasped for the handle of the new razor Marian got him for Christmas. His old one still dangled by the strap on its case next to the sink. He should have gotten rid of it by now. Should’ve gotten rid of it years ago when he first heard there was a more practical and convenient replacement. Aside from being intimately-acquainted with the skin on his face, the obsolete razor held no special meaning to him. He couldn’t remember where he bought it, nor how long he’d had it. It wasn’t the last of its kind. Straight razors remained in production and in stock on shelves. He’d traded in his pocket watch for a wristwatch. He didn’t know the last time he rode on wheels not harnessed to the power of internal combustion. Maybe, he never would again. His tobacco came machine-rolled, his candles were a decoration, there wasn’t a single item of clothing in his closet that had been made-to-measure. His life was ruled by practicality and convenience. There was an attractive rebellion to the impracticality and inconvenience of picking up the straight razor when the mood struck. The routine, altered some for the new device but not unrecognizably, was one he’d been doing for over half his life, down, down, up, up, right to left, face then neck, calming and refreshing in a way that balanced out the annoyance of the chore. No matter how often he repeated that the blade held against his neck deserved his full attention, muscle memory took over. His mind wandered away, making a list of to-dos for the coming week, reviewing his list from the last one. Viktoriya had been waiting with an answer for him, when he’d found the time to slip away during lunch again. I’m the same as ever. I’ve only had to change my course, not my destination. Erich could imagine the smile pulling on Tanya’s lips while she said it. Confident, undaunted, disbelieving. Amused that anyone would think to question it. I wouldn’t let God Himself get in my way, she’d said, mouth drawing wider until it was a parody of a grin, predatory, daring, as arrogance erased religious deference and she mocked the entity she ranked as next-most-powerful. The pinch of skin catching along the edge of his blade pulled his mind’s eye to see what his real eyes did - a rivulet of blood running down his neck. He dabbed at it roughly, just until the bleeding slowed and he could finish the rest of it without making a mess. Who did he think he was to survive standing in Tanya’s path? A man who injured himself with a safety razor? Off the top shelf of his cabinet he retrieved the old alum bar he had from days when he was shaving in dim light and dirty mirrors, dirtier hands and squalid trenches ready to turn the tiniest nicks into serious infections. Since he had it out, he rubbed it over the entirety of his face and neck, enjoying the pleasant tingle, not minding the astringent sting that meant it was sealing off the trickle of red when he ran it over his cut. The separated skin would grow back together without him noticing, reforming itself so effortlessly he’d have no way of seeing it wasn’t the same as what used to be there. The old Tanya wouldn’t have asked him for the name of a dentist, like any other young woman too aware of her cosmetic flaws and needing repeated affirmations from him that her teeth were acceptably straight, if not perfectly so. The old Tanya wouldn’t have dreamed of blushing or stuttering in embarrassment at admitting she fell so short on typical skills for girls her age she couldn’t make something as simple as jam and so was passing along the work of another woman. Civilian life agrees with me like you wouldn’t believe would not have dared try to pass through Lieutenant Colonel von Degurechaff’s lips. Little by little, Tanya was changing, new growth forming as she tried to bridge the gaps that tearing away her old way of life had made. She just couldn’t see it yet. 
 July 18, 1931Berun-Charité Hospital
 On the whole, Tanya wasn’t keen on celebrating her birthday. While she was aware that her day of death would have been recorded as February 22, 2013, subjectively, her memories of the date corresponding to July 18, 1913 on her current calendar were of her life ending, not beginning. With the exception of learning the answer to one of humanity’s all-time favorite questions - what happens after we die? - she couldn’t find much worth celebrating in there. Predictably, nobody else saw it her way. As someone young enough for each distinct year to come along with its own milestones - people her age were graduating high school and congratulating themselves by buying bottles of liquor and cartons of cigarettes - not caring to acknowledge it made her an anomaly. Ultimately, she’d waste less time raising a glass to another year of not giving into Being X than in making repeated excuses and explanations for why she didn’t want to. It was only for another two years. After she hit twenty and marked the final step off the “growing up” checklist by becoming an eligible voter, she fully planned on making use of her new gender to claim that as a woman, she didn’t want to celebrate getting any older. For now, she was mentally prepared to grin and bear it. What she’d failed to calculate was just how much grinning and bearing she’d need to do. Tanya stared down at the first gift she’d unwrapped. Visha had disguised the shape so expertly she’d had no idea what she was in for. She was a bit uneasy about what was lying in wait for her in the rest of her innocent-looking pile. “My uncle’s best friend makes it.” Visha crossed her arms and gave a sharp nod. “You can’t buy it at the store. Let’s have a taste.” Let’s not, Tanya thought, glancing down at the plain bottle of clear liquor again, the taped-on label reading “Samogon” looking like more of a warning than an advertisement. Whoever this Mr. Samogon was, his product packaging decisions didn’t leave her with much confidence in his desire to create something with broad consumer appeal. “Serebryakov,” Tanya said, keeping her voice firm. “I’m sure Mr. Samogon makes perfectly fine vodka, but it’s barely past lunch. We aren’t cracking open a bottle in the middle of the day.” Visha giggled behind her hand. “Samogon isn’t his name,” she explained. “It’s just what you call homemade liquor.” The revelation that she was in possession of moonshine didn’t help the image in Tanya’s head. Knowing that high-proof alcohol sanitized most everything it came in contact with only went so far in allaying her concerns about consuming an unlicensed product from an uninspected facility that she suspected was located in the woods behind someone’s home, where no one would notice the employee didn’t wash their hands after using the hygiene facility known as the nearest tree. She forced a smile onto her face nonetheless. “Thanks. I’ll try some after dinner.” Visha’s lips pursed into a frown. “So if it’s whiskey, it’s okay?” More than anything, Tanya wanted to stick her head in her hands. She’d been responsible for Visha’s training. She could only blame herself for teaching the other woman how to make ammunition out of anything your enemy gave you to work with. From Tanya’s standpoint, gamely going along with Lehrgen’s liquid lunch plans wasn’t a fair comparison. First off, he’d left her stuck between two extremes: accept the gift or reject it. In Visha’s case, she could accept the bottle to avoid being rude, while simultaneously deferring actual consumption. More importantly, the interpersonal context was completely different. All of her coworkers whose opinion mattered were men. As long as Visha didn’t consider her “one of the girls” to such a degree their relationship revolved around shoes, make-up, or who was dating who, Tanya gained no particular benefit from having Visha lump her in under the heading of “one of the boys.” “It’s your birthday,” Visha objected. “Your eighteenth. This is the time. Plus, it’s Saturday anyway.” When she put it that way, there was no arguing around it. At least not without giving offense. She supposed one sip wouldn’t kill her. After a toast and a tap of their cafeteria glasses, Tanya wasn’t so sure. There was a strong possibility she’d just ingested gasoline. Visha was beside herself with laughter. “Your face,” she repeated, over and over. “Oh my God, your face.” “This time, you are making fun of me,” Tanya noted, once she’d rinsed the taste down with water. “I think I’ve seen you take a bullet better,” Visha hiccuped, trying to get herself under control. She gestured towards the rest of the gifts. “Now you can open the rest.” Apprehensively, Tanya undid the tie on the next item. Her misgivings thankfully turned out to be unwarranted. “I don’t know how your apartment is decorated,” Visha said, gesturing at the empty wood-and-glass case Tanya was holding. “I thought you might want to hang your medals up.” It wasn’t Tanya’s first choice of wall-hangings. She could admit it would still be an improvement upon her current artistic style, which one might generously refer to as Meditations on Nothingness. “I left one blank in there,” Visha continued, pointing at the item underneath the shadow box, a triple picture frame already containing one photo of their original battalion and one of their group of four from that ball they’d attended. “I figured you might have something more recent you’d want to put in. Weiss sent me the smiling photo I asked you to take, but I’m holding onto that.” Tanya nodded along. At some point she’d find a photo worth sticking in the empty spot. Lifting up the next box was enough to tell her it had been packed so nothing inside could move. Gingerly, she peeled it all apart so she didn’t break the fragile contents. One by one, a mismatched set of six coffee cups came out. “One apiece from the coffeehouses Elya says are the best in the city,” Visha declared proudly. Tanya inspected the branding on each. While she might not need to hear all of Elya’s opinions, she wasn’t going to pass up this valuable piece of intelligence. “I didn’t realize any of them sold company merchandise,” Tanya commented, a worry niggling at the back of her mind. At this rate, she was going to be in the red when it came to what they’d decided they were willing to spend on each other. “You didn’t need to go to all that expense just for me.” Visha’s eyes drifted around. “I wouldn’t exactly say I had Elya buy them…” It wasn’t hard to imagine what method Elya had used to convince a waiter to let her walk away with a souvenir. All in all, Tanya wasn’t sure how she felt about using her gifts for everyday coffee drinking. Starting her morning thinking about Elya batting her eyes at someone didn’t sound likely to provide a productivity boost. “I wonder how her boyfriend feels about that,” Tanya mused, raising an eyebrow. Visha snickered behind a hand again. “The truth is worse than that. She can sneak anything out of anywhere. During training one time she went over to the officer’s section of the cafeteria and left with an entire pie in her bag without anyone noticing.” As a friend, Tanya was obviously somewhat of a failure. She’d merely proven a willingness to spend a bit of money on behalf of someone else, not to violate multiple laws. “I’m not sure what it says about me that I spend time with the two of you,” she joked. “A thief and a card sharp. Your degeneracy is going to rub off on me.” “Already has,” Visha shot back. “Weiss said you could hustle some billiards tables.” Tanya gave a bark of laughter as she reached for her final present. It was two books. The same book, actually, if she was transliterating the one written in Cyrillic correctly. The title Eugene Onegin wasn’t ringing any bells. “Your favorite book from a Rus author?” she guessed. Visha shook her head. “It’s the book that made the name Tanya popular,” she explained. “I thought you might find it a bit funny to have a copy. Even if you won’t let anyone call you by it.” “I never said that,” Tanya objected. “You still call me Serebryakov.” “I didn’t want to be disrespectful,” Tanya sniffed. “Most people I know are through the Army. I’m used to it. But there’s no good reason anymore you can’t use my first name. And I can call you whatever you want.” “Viktoriya or Visha,” she shrugged, flashing a smile. “Elya got my nickname a bit wrong, but I’m used to it now.” “Alright,” Tanya nodded, beginning to gather up the discarded wrapping material so she wasn’t surrounded by a mess. “Is your real name Tatiana?” Visha questioned after a moment. “I always meant to ask.” “Maybe it was supposed to be,” Tanya shrugged. “But I don’t think so. My mother sent a letter to the orphanage just before she died. You’d think she’d have mentioned me at least once by my proper name.” Despite her words implying that her mother might have been a semi-rational human being, Tanya’s primary impression of her biological parents was that as people, they had left a lot to be desired. In that sense, they’d been a good match for each other. Overall, she knew slightly more about her father, owing to his record of service in the Army. Born to a destitute family northwest of Berun in 1886, died in Alsatia, 1913. She’d give her mother the benefit of the doubt and assume she’d correctly identified Anton Zimmerman as the other half of Tanya’s equation. That wasn’t saying much in her favor. As her mother had been living in Berun at the time, she’d had plenty of better options to invite along for a roll in the hay. Once she realized she was pregnant, at the least she could have found someone financially stable to hop in bed with, assign paternity to, and foist her unwanted child off on. In any case, assuming Tanya was indeed a descendant of the Zimmerman clan, it wasn’t a familial connection worth pursuing. She’d identified a still-living uncle, some cousins, and a handful of more distant relatives she could claim, should she want to. Given their employment - or lack thereof, in many cases - she suspected that claiming them would result in more than a few hangers-on eager to share her dubious fame and meager fortune. All Tanya knew about her maternal ancestry was the last name she shared with them. Presumably, if they’d been people of note, her mother wouldn’t have died of tuberculosis in a poorhouse when she was four. Anna Degurechaff had left a letter prior to her death. It hadn’t contained much in the way of usable information, and had basically amounted to a long apology for being a bad parent. While Tanya could appreciate a person who learned to take responsibility for their failures, neither that nor the simple fact that they shared some genetic code had seemed a good enough reason to accumulate clutter. The day the car came to take her to officer training, she’d passed off the letter to Erna along with the other personal possessions she no longer had a use for. Frankly, she was better off without her parents. She’d already had one far superior set, and at this point, it was more likely she’d be supporting them than the other way around. “Was your mother Rus?” Visha asked after a moment. Tanya shrugged. “Your name makes me think so,” Visha mused. “Though the Catholic upbringing makes me think Polaskan.” With no good response, Tanya merely shrugged again. Her mother’s given name gave her no clearer idea of her heritage than that she had probably been a native speaker of an Indo-European language. “Maybe all the rituals just reminded her of the Orthodox Church, and that’s why she chose it,” Visha went on, nodding to herself. “Either way, I don’t think the Germanian nationalists would be so fond of me if they thought about it too hard,” Tanya joked, diverting their conversation before Visha could suggest she attend a few Orthodox services to compare notes between the two. “Thanks for the books.” “Oh,” Visha said. “Right. I forgot. I didn’t want your visits to start boring you. I was thinking I could teach you more Rus. We could work up to the untranslated version.” Tanya nodded her acceptance with a smile. This was the very reason the other woman had made such a spectacular adjutant. She anticipated problems - this one being that they were soon going to run out of good discussion material and devolve into idle gossip to fill time - and had seamlessly suggested a solution that was both practical and kept the friendly flow of conversation going. Before she could thank Visha for her thoughtfulness, they were interrupted by a nurse coming to wheel her out for a minor surgical procedure. Watching Visha’s legs swing out of her bed and into a wheelchair, Tanya couldn’t help but stare at the unusual sight. She ran a hand up along her own shin. In her past life, her unshorn state would have been something of a radical political statement. For now, she could get away with it. She saw no need to remove hair she was used to having. Even with shortening hemlines on dresses, all that tended to be revealed underneath was stockings. Few women that didn’t need to went to the trouble of hair removal. She could say with certainty that Visha’s legs had only become hairless due to medical expediency. Had she wanted to use the occasion of her eighteenth birthday to begin exploring Berun’s nightlife, she supposed she could become more accustomed to seeing clean-shaven legs once again. In the photos she’d seen of the dancers at the clubs, it looked like they engaged in the practice. For various reasons, she’d rather not discover what went on in the city after midnight. Aside from the waste of time and money, she didn’t need the back of her head plagued with concerns about how her old self would have judged either that decision nor the one she’d made not to alter the natural state of her body. “Sorry I couldn’t stay longer,” Visha waved on her way out. “Happy birthday! Go have fun without me!” Tanya didn’t have the heart to tell Visha that her evening appointment was going to be in the company of a woman of the cloth, so waved her out with a smile in return. Not wanting to give Ugar the wrong impression of what she and another woman were going to get up to in the privacy of her apartment, she’d told a simple untruth when he’d called, and once again leaned on her boss as the patron for his poor young employee. Even claiming she was being taken out to an expensive dinner hadn’t been enough to rouse Ugar’s voice out of subtle disappointment over her unadventurous plans. She could only imagine how he’d react to hearing the truth. Visha would eventually learn it. That would be after the fact, when she couldn’t try to convince Tanya to spend an evening in a drunken haze and wake up next to someone she’d never seen before, or however it was her peers in Berun defined the word “fun”. Fortuitously, Tanya ran into the main doctor responsible for Visha’s care in the hall. On account of her inquisitiveness, their relationship had started off a bit rocky. In this era, the doctor’s orders were just that. Questions from patients or other concerned parties weren’t the norm when the average person’s medical knowledge was limited to basic first aid, and independent research was close to impossible. After he’d extracted a promise from her to console Visha with a proper Christmas gift the next year, Dr. Eichler had become somewhat more open to discussing what he was doing and why. While she didn’t particularly like having her contribution to Visha’s life reduced to the level of Santa - a man celebrated for taking off 364 days out of the year - agreeing to play the part of an innocently curious girl had gotten him to do more than brush her questions off. “Dr. Eichler,” Tanya greeted, giving a wave. “If you have a moment?” Upon receiving an affirmative response, Tanya removed a small bandage from her left hand to reveal a cut with a minor infection. Her cooking injury had humbled her more than one might expect. She’d been forced to confront the fact that she may have survived a world war only to die ignominiously of a treatable flesh wound later in life. “Do you have anything with penicillin?” she asked, wondering if the word would trigger any recognition among a member of the medical community. “Penicillin?” “I think I overheard one of my doctors mention it when I had an infection during the war,” Tanya lied, already prepared for the response. “It cleared it up right away.” She was banking on the natural competitiveness and intellectual curiosity of a top doctor in a top research facility driving him to look into the treatment. Based on her understanding of her previous world, they shouldn’t have been particularly far from a discovery. Perhaps only a little serious testing away from breaking free from bacteria’s plague on mankind. Despite having little concern over the trajectory of her current injury, she’d like not to have to face complications from a future one. Plus, if she kickstarted the discovery process, the next time she saw Being X she’d get to rub it in his face that she’d done more good for humanity than he’d ever dreamed of achieving. “That’ll heal on its own,” Eichler dismissed. “But still-,” “Ms. Degurechaff,” he interrupted with a kindly laugh. “I know you’re smart for a girl your age, but is it too much to hope that one day you’ll accept I know how to do my job better than you do?” Tanya gave a sheepish smile. “I think I might miss you when your friend’s all done in here, you know,” he went on, putting a hand on her shoulder. “None of my other patients keep me on my toes like you do. But that’ll heal on its own. And I’ve got a surgery to get to.” Tanya sighed and turned to leave. It had been worth a try. A bit of proof on her side would evidently be necessary before Dr. Eichler accepted that in certain respects, she did know how to do his job better than he did. By the time she’d walked home, she barely had a minute to spare putting away her gifts when the door buzzed to indicate her next guest had arrived, almost thirty minutes ahead of schedule. Habitual tardiness was one of her least favorite personality traits. Habitually arriving much too early was somehow worse. “If you’d come a few minutes before I wouldn’t have been here,” Tanya commented, letting Erna in. “I wanted to get out before I had to help get ready for evening Mass.” Erna glanced around, then pointed to the bottle of liquor on the kitchen counter. “What’s that?” “A present from another friend. It’s homemade.” “Let’s have some.” “You can have some,” Tanya emphasized. “But it’s strong.” “I’ve been sneaking off with communion wine since I was fourteen,” Erna replied, giving her a thumbs up as though she expected to be congratulated for it. “Then you’ll like this,” Tanya said. “It tastes better.” Erna took a seat while Tanya poured her a small glass. She included a cup of water for her when she filled one for herself. “Aren’t you supposed to like preparing for Mass?” Tanya questioned, taking a seat next to Erna and watching her shudder her way through her first sip. “Well, you know how it is,” Erna replied evasively. “It’s a lot of work. Getting the kids all cleaned up and everything.” “You were the one who decided you wanted to teach them religion,” Tanya shrugged. “I was a bit surprised. You always skipped as much catechism as you could.” Erna glanced around, then poured herself a second drink instead of replying. “What?” Tanya asked. “You won’t like it.” “I’ve learned to put up with a lot of things I don’t like,” she scoffed. “Try me.” “The sisters took us in and gave us a good life when our own mothers didn’t want us,” Erna muttered, looking at her feet. “I wanted to do the same. That’s all. I never really cared for much of the rest. All the praying especially.” Tanya’s respect for her old bunkmate rose a notch. Still not the type of heart-over-hard logic decision she would make for herself, but several degrees more acceptable than she’d previously thought. “That’s good of you,” she said honestly. “I’m not sure why you thought I’d disapprove.” “Someone told me you prayed when-,” “Everyone prays on the battlefield,” Tanya interrupted. “All it means is you want someone to save you. Not that you believe anyone’s listening.” Erna nodded, and went to pour herself a third drink. Tanya eyed it with suspicion. “You sure you’ll be able to make it back tonight?” “I’ll just stay here,” Erna yawned. Tanya blinked a few times. At no point had Erna brought that possibility up beforehand, and at no point had Tanya invited her. “What?” Erna griped. “We shared a room for how long and you’re going to tell me you’re too good for me now? Your bed’s big enough for both of us.” It wasn’t hard to understand why her reluctance confused Erna. For most of this life, Tanya’s sleeping arrangements had been rather communal in nature. Besides, they were both young women, and had grown up together. She took more issue with the sudden invasion of her privacy than the possibility that it would cause a sudden invasion of prurient thoughts in her head. She had by no means lost her ability to visually appreciate attractive women. Her desire to do something about it thankfully wasn’t what it used to be. The only signs she had any interest in doing more with anyone were a few errant dreams she’d done her best to forget. “If it weren’t for my kids I’d stay the day tomorrow too,” Erna declared, evidently taking Tanya’s silence as acquiescence. “Your kids?” she laughed. “There’s two that have the same father.” Erna crossed her arms. “Different mothers, though. I’m making a little family with them. Most adorable little things you ever saw.” “Well, here’s to hoping you don’t collect a third,” Tanya said, pouring a very small portion of liquor for the both of them. Immediately afterwards, Erna spun out of her chair and grabbed her bag off the hook by the door. “Your present,” she said, holding a small box out for Tanya to take. As soon as she took it, she could tell it was jewelry. Besides wondering where Erna had gotten the money, she was beginning to rethink whether Erna really knew her well enough to count as something like her emergency contact. Tanya dutifully unwrapped the package. When she lifted out the simple silver chain, monogrammed disc stamped with the letter “T” hanging from the center, she recognized it as the necklace Erna had worn as a child. “This was your mother’s, wasn’t it?” she asked, wondering how many of the small scratches in the metal could be attributed to the adventures Erna had taken it on. “It was.” “You don’t have to give it away,” Tanya protested. “If you couldn’t think of something else, I’m fine with nothing.” “It’s not that,” Erna said, gesturing for the necklace. “It’s uncomfortable under my coif. And the only jewelry I can wear over it is this.” She flicked her rosary, then walked behind Tanya. “It had been so long since I’d worn it, it took about two days to get the tarnish off.” Erna’s hands came around her neck to clip it on. “I’m giving it a better life. So you have to promise you’ll wear it. If you lie, I’ll tell my mother’s ghost to come haunt you.” “You don’t even know if she’s dead,” Tanya reminded her. “Then if a forty-year-old lady starts bothering you, you’ll know why.” Tanya walked towards her mirror to judge whether she’d take her chances with a haunting. Aside from the lettered disc, most of the necklace was invisible under her collar. The inscribed “T” peeked out from the space between the undone top buttons of her shirt. Altogether, it wasn’t an unpleasant addition to her usual ensemble. If anything, it would reassure the traditionalist crowd that her unladylike fashion choices had been made for no reasons other than practicality. “Theresa?” she asked, trying to recall the name of the necklace’s original owner. “Good memory,” Erna smiled. “And a lucky coincidence. If your name didn’t start with a T, I’d have made you wear it backwards so the blank side shows.” For Erna’s own birthday in a few weeks, Tanya would have no way of repaying the sentimental value of her gift. “I guess as my present to you, I’ll promise to wear it,” she agreed. “Well…” Erna said, twisting her shoulders back and forth, hands clasped behind her back. The second gift Erna wanted from her turned out not to be for herself, and happily, required nothing from Tanya but a few words to her coworkers. Apparently, the orphanage’s selection of reading material hadn’t improved since her own childhood. That was to say: Bibles, children’s bibles, stories about the saints, for both adults and children - the latter type tended to skimp on the details of exactly how one came to be a martyr - and a handful of nonreligious books in varying states of decay. As Erna explained it, financial contributions to St. Mary’s were spent on items deemed more necessary than secular fiction. Drumming up some literary donations would ensure impressionable children weren’t assaulted by messages of worship from all sides, round out their education better, and provide stories that were actually well-written, realistic, and entertaining. Getting ready for bed, the sounds of what was forming into something of an evening routine started coming through the wall she shared with the apartment next door. “Do you hear that often?” Erna asked, staring like she wanted to look through to the other side. “They moved in at the beginning of the month,” Tanya sighed, making herself heard over the knock of the headboard. “It’s better than when they fight. Over a lot faster.” If the trend continued, she was going to have to resort to pounding on the wall to remind her neighbors they weren’t alone in the building. Living in trenches had taught her to sleep through any noise she didn’t want to be woken up for. That was no cause to let her tolerance for such things be taken advantage of. She remained as uninterested in reality TV as she’d been in her last life. From what she could tell, her primary enemy was hated by several other women, including his wife. Most nights, at least. Despite being what society would define as an adult male, the constant harangues of Geri this and Geri that, Geri, Geri, Geri, left her with the impression that this man had yet to learn about the concept of boundaries, or why they were important in a civilized society. Geri’s wife yelled at him for making passes at her sister. The sister yelled at Geri for thinking his in-law status exempted him from the pay-for-play business she had going on the weekends. Geri’s children - three, by the different voices Tanya could hear - had even taken to yelling at their father by his given name. At least they were on the right track. All the kids wanted was for him to get a job. Soon, Tanya was going to chime in with the same advice, as well as tipping the adult residents off that divorce had become somewhat easier to initiate under their new system of laws. Erna was using the extra pillow Tanya typically put over her head to assist in her quest of blissful ignorance. Waiting for the noise to stop gave her some time to think about Erna’s last request. As her coworkers trended older and wealthier than the average soldier, she imagined they wouldn’t mind parting with a few titles they knew they’d never read again. However, she had to consider the intended audience. Most of the orphanage’s charges weren’t old enough to digest complex and lengthy historical examinations. In all probability, even the ones who could weren't going to pick those up for fun. The women she worked with were likely to be less averse to tacitly admitting they read books written for unserious, nonacademic consumption, as well as potentially having slightly more realistic opinions about what types of books kids wanted to read. The badge of good father could still be earned with a stable job and strict hand at discipline. Often, that provided something of a disincentive for getting to know your own children. For the purpose of appealing to the heartstrings of the office typists and file clerks, she’d be enlisting Lieutenant Sauer for aid. Were it not for the fact Sauer had felt the need to reassure her that he was as generous with his offers of financial assistance for uncreating pesky inconveniences as he was generous with providing opportunities to create them, spearheading a donation drive would have been a moral duty for him. Half the unclaimed children in Berun might otherwise be his. Normally, she wasn’t one for charity work. But if Erna wanted to engage in subversive activities against Being X for her birthday, Tanya would do her part to support it. That’s what friends were for, after all. xXx “An Einspänner coffee for you, sir.” “And madame, your Weaner Melange and Punschkrapfen.” The potent aroma of coffee mixed with faint hints of chocolate and other pastries permeated the air of what was known for being Berun’s best Wean-style coffeehouse. It was a pleasant enough place to pass a few hours, for those who had that kind of time to spare. The heavy drapes and cushioned chairs soaked up most of the sound, leaving only a backdrop of white noise. A low hum of quiet chatter, the faint clank of porcelain, the rustle of newspapers as their pages turned. “And for you…” the waiter paused, examining his patron’s uniform. His eyes widened and he straightened up smartly a second later. “...General?” The man in question puffed at his cigarette instead of sighing the way he wanted to. In spite of the uniform - he’d come from a morning in the office - he’d held onto a glimmer of hope that he wouldn’t get that reaction. Few enough able-bodied men had escaped serving in the war, and as soon as they registered his rank they tended to revert to a stiff formality even now. It made it so his free time wasn’t really his own. Not in public, at least. There were days he wondered what it would be like to be Erich. Just Erich. The fictional Just Erich, who existed only for Elise, and himself when he was with her, wouldn’t be in this café spending his Saturday afternoon hunting down a token birthday gift for Tanya Degurechaff. Just Erich would never have met her. Maybe would never have even heard the name. Erich von Lehrgen, however, had made a promise to himself over a year ago not to attract inconvenient questions about why Ernst got birthday gifts and Tanya didn’t. Most years, he bought his adjutant something simple. A pack of cigarettes. A pack of beer. Nothing more than a friendly acknowledgement of the day. For Tanya, he planned the same, except she didn’t like cigarettes, and hadn’t betrayed much affection for beer. Her caffeine addiction was the next closest thing. Lehrgen cleared his throat to reply to the waiter in front of him. “I was interested in buying some of your coffee beans.” “...the beans, sir?” “You’re known for having some of the best coffee in the city. Surely part of that is the beans themselves?” “Well, yes, but the preparation is-,” “The person I’m buying for drinks her coffee black and strong. I think she’ll appreciate the quality over anything else.” “Is she a customer of ours, sir?” the waiter asked, a hint of a smile appearing on his face. “Yes,” Lehrgen muttered, growing a bit irritated at the unnecessary question. “I’m told she comes here most Saturday afternoons.” The other man’s eyebrows gave a quick jerk upwards, and he made a small exclamation of “ah, that one,” under his breath. He went behind the counter to speak with a coworker. Perhaps his manager. Until recently, coffeehouses hadn’t been the sorts of venues that were appropriate for women, and there were still relatively few of them who came alone to wile away a Sunday afternoon reading the paper. Fewer still who took their coffee the way Tanya did. It wasn’t so surprising that she’d be a memorable presence in the lives of the staff. He’d never met someone so memorable in all his life. He didn’t need anyone else but her competing for that title. After she’d been working for a few months, he’d subtly inquired with a few people over whether they’d seen her outside of work, and what she might be doing. At the time, he’d been uncertain that her relative calm in the office translated into the rest of her life. She’d been an enemy like any other. The old adage to know your enemy had rung just as true as advice for her as it did for the people who warranted the term on paper. Not much had come out of the covert investigation, aside from the usual - she shopped for groceries, had someone else do her laundry, occasionally went for some exercise in a park. Her patronage of this establishment had been one of the items noted. From behind the menu he was perusing for the tenth time, Lehrgen eyed the men behind the counter, wondering what was taking so long. They were gossiping, animated and agitated, occasionally glancing at him out of the corners of their eyes. He’d heard it all, at this point, the reasons people assigned to his rank that weren’t hard work combined with intelligence combined with wartime necessity, a dose of assistance from family legacy on the side. Who his father must be, how rich his father must be, who he knew, who knew him, in another sense of the word. In its own strange way, he’d always found the latter as flattering as it was insulting. A minute later, his waiter returned and gave an apologetic shrug. “We could sell you the beans, sir, but the coffee we serve is a blend of several types. It wouldn’t be the same.” Lehrgen’s eyelids fluttered shut in annoyance. “Just give me the best one, then.” “Well, I don’t know if there’s one that’s the best,” the waiter began. “We have one from…” Lehrgen drew in a long breath through his cigarette, resigning himself to listening to a lecture on the flavor profiles of every different coffee bean the shop had in stock. His own taste in the drink wasn’t particular enough to require that level of knowledge. Some connoisseurs could go on and on, the same way a vintner could explain the uniqueness of every strain of grape and each bottle of wine. “...you can taste a hint of chocolate-,” “That one,” Lehrgen interrupted. “A kilogram of it. Grind it and package it nicely, if you would.” “Will that be all, sir?” “Two of those, if you would,” he decided. Elise would appreciate the spontaneous gift. “And I’ll take the house specialty. No cream or sugar.” The waiter ducked his head deferentially and went to fulfill the request. A minute later, Lehrgen had his own cup in hand to nurse while he waited. He closed his eyes for his first sip, tried to give it the same care he’d extend to a fine wine. It was why he’d foregone the cream he typically took. The coffee was bitter on the tip of his tongue, bold and unapologetic. The acidity mellowed as it traveled further along, gaining hints of other flavors, hitting deep notes of chocolate or expensive cognac, barely there dashes of floral highs to offset, finishing with an unexpected twist - aniseed or caraway, he couldn’t decide - to round it off. It wasn’t a coffee he’d drink for the taste alone, at least not by the metric of how easy it went down. It wasn’t what he’d drink when he was looking for the quickest route to a morning fix. Its enjoyment was reserved exclusively for taking the time to savor it. As far as coffee went, Tanya’s preferred brand wasn’t half bad. By the time he’d taken his two bags and walked them to a gym locker, the effect of the caffeine had him wondering why it wasn’t a regular feature of his Saturday afternoons. Jogging an extra kilometer came without an internal argument; he was halfway through a fourth set of weights before he realized it was one too many. When he caught sight of a familiar face unexpectedly - he’d chosen the location specifically to avoid coworkers - he didn’t mind being noticed. “Wechter,” he called out, after they’d made eye contact. “I didn’t know you came here.” The other man walked nearer. “Just with a friend today.” “I thought you were married,” Lehrgen joked. “Who’ve you got to impress?” “My son’s old enough to start copying what I do. I have to set a good example.” Wechter groaned and took a pair of weights from the rack. “And you? I was thinking you were fortunate enough to avoid the whole ordeal.” “All the more reason to keep myself young,” he shot back. “Lucky you,” Wechter said, with a rueful laugh. Whether it was the work he’d put in at the gym recently or the gift he gave Elise for no particular reason that had her coming home with him following dinner, he didn’t want to ask. He suspected the answer was the latter. His second package of coffee had to wait until Tuesday to be handed off. He only saw Tanya in passing that Monday, never at a good time to run back to his office to grab the present that was waiting for her. Over lunch, he reached for a pen to make a quick note, congratulations, well-wishes, and the like, to accompany his gift. His favorite Waterman, courtesy of a transatlantic shipment from his brother, was gone. He knew who had it. The frequency with which Tanya walked away with his more expensive pens toed the line of coincidence. The frequency with which he needed to remind her of it before she returned them crossed it. He picked up his phone. “Sauer,” he said. “Get a car ready. Quick as you can. We need to be back within the hour.” Ten minutes later, he was directing them towards Karlottenburg. Twenty minutes after that, he had two Pelikan pens, one box wrapped, one not. It was a more appropriate gift for the occasion than a paltry bag of coffee beans. It would result in the return of his Waterman, and perhaps halt any mysterious disappearances in the future. “Pens?” Ernst questioned, eyeing the brand on the bag. “You could’ve borrowed one of mine for the rest of the day if that’s what you needed. I’m sure your hand would have survived a few hours touching the ones they give us for free.” “It’s so Tanya stops taking mine,” he said, waving at the gift-wrapped box. “Her birthday was over the weekend.” Before starting the car, Ernst glanced back to look at the second item. “It’s a nice pen,” Lehrgen grumbled. “After I tried it out I wanted one for myself. I couldn’t help it.” Back in the office, a few minutes to spare, he set pen to stationery like he’d meant to nearly an hour before. The only word that came easily was Tanya’s name. There was too much to say if he was serious about reflecting on where she’d come from and where he hoped the next eighteen years would take her; too little to fill the page if he stuck with a perfunctory congratulations. Her voice broke him away from his thoughts, still stuck on the first sentence, Tanya—. Her eyes held a question for him once they saw it. “I’m no good at getting sentimental,” he explained. “I couldn’t figure out what I wanted to write. So. Happy birthday. I hope it was a good weekend. And here.” He pulled her gifts from beneath his desk. First the coffee in its brown bag, block-lettering done by hand on the front to match the type style of the sign on the café’s door. Tanya took it from him. “Thank you,” she said, holding it nearer to her face to inhale the scent. “I didn’t know they sold it to take home.” He shook his head with a small laugh. “I think I got it mostly because the waiter didn’t know how to disobey orders from a general. You might have to tow me along if you ever want more.” With a smile, she turned to put the bag down on the table behind her. “I may take you up on that offer.” Her next gift was already waiting on the end of his desk when she spun back around. There was a certain reverence to the way she lifted the top off the box. Her face didn’t light up when she saw what was inside, but softened, into a gentle, contented happiness. At first all she did was run her fingers lightly over the ornate gold detailing that chased around the black body. When she did take the pen out, she used both hands, cradling it while her eyes made their inspection. “I-,” she started, pausing to take a breath. “I really don’t know what to say. It almost feels like too much to accept just yet. I’m not sure I’ve done enough to deserve it.” “I expect to see you getting plenty of use out of it over the years,” he shrugged, with a small smile, nudging her to remember this was a perk of continuing along her current officework-only path. “I consider it an investment for the future.” “Thank you,” she said quietly. “Really.” She uncapped the pen and leaned forward over his desk to touch it to the paper of the aborted note he’d meant to write her. The glint of silver at the hollow of her throat caught his attention when she did. He stared curiously at the necklace, appreciating the sight of jewelry incapable of causing explosions on her. Normalcy was a beautiful thing. “It writes nicely,” Tanya commented. “Though that doesn’t improve my handwriting much.” Erich shook himself out of his reverie and cleared his throat, eyes going back to focus on what he was supposed to be looking at. She caught the end of his distraction anyway. Her left hand rose self-consciously to splay out over her chest and cover the new addition to her wardrobe. “It looks nice,” he said, clearing his throat again, hoping to reassure her he didn’t disapprove of her deviation away from military standard. He tapped where he’d written her name earlier. “Anyway, you don’t want to know how many hours of practice it took until the etiquette teacher was satisfied I could produce a fancy dinner party invitation on command.” She took her seat at his table, hand briefly going to touch at the silver medallion on her neck a second time. As usual, he immersed himself into the world she built as she told the story of what she was working on, ordered and organized to make sense out of the mess of information. That habit of hers was unchanged. What was missing was the constant rustle of pages lifting and turning so she could double-check facts and figures each time he asked a question. He’d made sure not to mention it the handful of times she’d quoted one incorrectly. “I’m leaving for Londinium after work tomorrow,” he reminded her, when the clock was advancing on three. “I won’t be here Thursday or next Tuesday.” She nodded. “I know.” Her head cocked to the side. “Is there more to this agreement than what we’ve been told?” “No,” he said, then gave a rueful laugh. “Not unless they haven’t told me either. My job is to appear there and make it look more important than it is.” In its own way, the diplomatic niceties of guaranteeing borders with their northern and western neighbors was meaningful. They could return to a normal - tense, but normal - relationship once the Empire signed some papers saying its handcuffs weren’t all that was stopping it from throwing punches. The words were only worth so much. They were sincere in the way a solemn vow never to drink like that again was sincere during a hangover. “I was going to work on the fortifications project while you were gone,” Tanya said. “Not too hard, I hope.” “I’m going to work hard at giving myself more work to do on it before I can call it an accurate assessment of all possibilities,” she joked. “I think I’m going to end up needing documents we’ve got filed away in deep storage. Could you write a note for the archivist so he doesn’t argue about whether I need them?” Lehrgen glanced at the clock again, then checked his schedule. “Come on,” he said, motioning for her to follow. “I’ll take you down.” He made a detour first, to reschedule his next meeting. “Wechter,” he said. “I’ll catch up with you before I leave tomorrow. I’ve got to give Degurechaff a tour of the archives.” “What did she do to piss you off so badly you’re sticking her in timeout?” Wechter asked, pulling a face. Lehrgen laughed. “She’s the one who asked for it. I’m going to let her loose down there to do whatever it is she wants. It’s my birthday gift to her.” Wechter gave a laugh back, shaking his head. “She is a funny one,” he commented. “Good luck. I hated it the time I had to go get something in there. I was convinced if I got lost, no one would hear me shouting for help.” “No one can hear you down in the deep,” he agreed, head drifting over his shoulder to glance back at Tanya. Five years ago, he never would have contemplated putting himself in a position to be isolated and at Tanya’s mercy. “It’s true. But I know my way around. I’m safe as long as she doesn’t get that kind of carried away.” “Well, if I don’t see you tomorrow, I’ll know where to look,” Wechter said, waving him off. Their resident archivist stared through watery, pale blue eyes as they approached his desk. “Herbert,” Lehrgen addressed him. “Degurechaff’s going to be in and out for a while. I’ll show her around, but she might need your help finding things.” “As long as she can put things back how she found them,” he said, peering down his nose, voice as thin and reedy as the man himself. The instant Tanya’s posture flipped from idle perusal of the papers laying around into aggression was palpable, standing as close as they were in the tight vestibule. Lehrgen’s right hand dropped off the counter to make a nonverbal hold back touch to the inside of her elbow. “I can vouch for it,” he nodded. “I’m giving her my key for the week. I’d like to get her a copy made as soon as you can.” Suspicious eyes darted back and forth between the both of them. “She’s not like the field officers you’re used to,” he promised. Safely on the other side of the door and down their first cramped hallway, he filled Tanya in. “Herbert’s an alright sort of guy,” he explained. “The archives had a host of people not used to handling much record-keeping coming and going during the war, leaving a mess, spilling their drinks, forgetting to write down what they’d checked in and out. I don’t think he’s ever going to get over it. Once he realizes you know how to treat his filing system right, he’ll be your best friend. He delivered homemade pecan rolls to me personally the last two Christmas mornings.” It took longer than he expected to show Tanya through the stacks, bouncing from section to section. Geological surveys and weather records, plans for existing fortifications and ones they’d never built, specifications running from costs of materials to how each type of unit could be expected to perform under various offensive and defensive scenarios. For everything that could be relevant, he found her the room, the shelf, sometimes down to the exact box. “One more, if you don’t mind,” she said, after he’d stopped to ask himself if he’d missed anything and decided he hadn’t. “I’d think we’d have assessments of industrial and other economic capacities around somewhere. Who makes what, who trades with who, and how much of each.” He raised an eyebrow. “You think you’ll be needing that?” “I’m being thorough,” she defended, spreading her palms open with a smile. It took him three wrong turns to find the label on the room he was hunting for. “I’m not sure anyone besides me and Herbert know this section is here,” he said, pushing at the door with his shoulder as old hinges fought against him. “I had a lot to catch up on after three promotions given out of turn. Spent a lot of hours down here after I took this job. Herbert won’t stay a second past five-thirty without a gun to his head, which is probably why he’s never getting out of here, so I had to figure it out for myself. I’ve got a little map I drew laying around somewhere. I’ll drop it on your desk before I leave.” As soon as his hand blindly pushed the switch for the light, Tanya sneezed. “This is almost as bad as my attic,” he commented, swiping a finger along the wood of the out-of-place piano stashed in the room to judge how thick the dust was. “And just as full of old things that’ll probably never get used again.” Tanya followed his example, dragging a finger along the cover before she pushed it back to expose the keys. The note rang out clear when she pressed one down, the sound no worse than the one sitting in his salon made. A bad comparison, perhaps, since it was last tuned when he’d still secretly feared his mother might show up unannounced and take it the wrong way, like it meant he hadn’t loved the nights she filled the house with music. For that, his father might have evicted him. “I remember when they brought it down here,” he laughed. “Once the office was getting crowded and we had to make space in the banquet hall. It took about fifty people, all supposedly some of the brightest problem-solvers in the country, to make it work. I hope no one thinks they’re ever going to get it back out.” “Should have kept some of your mages in strategic reserve here,” Tanya deadpanned. “It would be embarrassing if it took five of us.” “I’ll remember to pencil in the furniture-moving skillset next time I’m calculating capacities,” he nodded with false sagacity, tapping at one of his temples. Her hand moved again, fourth and fifth fingers exchanging quickly to tap out the first five notes to Für Elise. She stopped after that, though her hand was poised in the right position to keep going. He’d dabbled in the art enough times to know. “Can you play?” he asked incredulously. “No,” she said. Her hand retracted off the keys like they’d shocked her. “No. Someone just showed me that part once. It’s easy to remember.” He nodded with relief. “Good. I think my niece would cry if I told her you were just as good.” Tanya looked at him quizzically. “She’s been practicing for being a good hostess her entire life. You haven’t.” “Does she want to be a good hostess?” “I doubt it,” he chuckled. “Then she probably wouldn’t care enough to cry about it,” Tanya pointed out. “Maybe not,” he smiled, not bothering to add that few elementary-aged children were as swayed by a logical comparison of goals to results as Tanya had been at that age. “From what I hear she’d idolize Elya if they ever met. I think my brother’ll let her do as she likes as long as she doesn’t cause too much trouble with it.” He shifted over to sit on the bench. He got further along than Tanya - nine notes - finishing off the song’s opening melody before giving up when the left hand became involved. “Which reminds me,” he said, looking over his shoulder at her. “Random question. You studied all the countries we were up against enough you might have the answer.” She gave a nod while he tried to find a note that sounded correct enough to prompt his own mind to recall the information he was looking for. “Do you know how the American national anthem goes? My brother mentioned it and I realized I couldn’t say for the life of me how it sounded.” Tanya’s eyes closed. Over them, her brows drew together in intense concentration. “I can’t remember the name,” she murmured with a frown. “Just that it had a really strange word in it. It starts off like…” She cleared her throat and took a step away from him. Half-spoken, half-sung, she gave it a try - Oh say can you see - before her voice petered out again with a shrug. “Not ringing any bells,” he said, with a shrug back. “Thanks for trying, though. I was just curious.” In his last letter, Otto had made a passing remark over his new country changing it to something else. In the end, it wasn’t important to know the answer. He’d find out one day when he got around to taking his brother up on his open invitation for a visit. Erich rose and jerked his head to get Tanya to follow him back out through the maze. “I’ll drop off that map tomorrow,” he promised again, saying his goodbyes. “Call me if you have any questions. Or just want to talk about something you’re thinking over. Please. I’ll probably be bored out of my mind.” xXx With Lehrgen gone, Tanya had a number of tasks on her plate. None of them were directly related to her work, which made his absence a good time to make a head start. She picked up her new pen to make a list, smiling in spite of herself. Normally, she disliked receiving expensive presents on the principle that the price of most luxury goods was inflated well beyond the cost of craftsmanship. She was then obligated to repay the favor at the nominal value of the gift, instead of based on how much real value it added to her life. The newest addition to her office fell into the small overlap that existed between items she fully valued owning luxury versions of, and items she was somewhat too practical to justify parting with her own cash to acquire. She’d always detested the label of “cheap” she’d occasionally been assigned for such views. Cheap was someone who was unable to properly recognize that higher quality goods had more value than their more basic substitutes. Practical was refusing to pay double for a brand that wasn’t twice as good; cheap was refusing to pay for something better simply on the grounds that it was more expensive. As she was not, in fact, a cheap person, her first order of business was to ensure she did better than gift Lehrgen a meaningless token of acknowledgement when the time came. Aside from his assertion that his birthday was late in the year, she was currently so underprepared she didn’t even know her project deadline. Luckily, the oversight could be rectified with a single question to Sauer. Since she already had a favor to ask him that was better done in person, she made her way over to his desk. First, she checked the bigger item off her to-do list. Sauer took a little convincing, but in the end agreed to being the co-chair of her charity book drive event. The conversation ended up using more of the day than she’d planned. It was the exact reason she’d waited until her boss was gone before soliciting participation from her coworkers. She was sure he’d appreciate the effort she was putting in and count it towards her goal of rounding out her civilian life, in theory. She wasn’t so sure he’d appreciate how many minutes it took away from her work in actuality. After gauging his reaction to dragging in his own adjutant, she might contemplate putting more weight on the foot she was sticking into the minefield. Once she’d brought Sauer up to speed on their joint project, she circled back to her other question. He snickered in response. “I was there for his thirtieth birthday, you know,” Sauer said. “Not as a guest. We hadn’t met yet. Just happened to be in the same bar. Probably wouldn’t remember I’d seen him before if it weren’t for his brother.” “I get the impression they aren’t particularly similar.” “Otto needs to have an audience,” Sauer nodded. “Always. You’d hate him as a boss, I’d bet. I’d have gotten along great, up until the moment we were such bad influences on each other we both got fired for it.” He stood up like he was going to give a presentation. “Otto goes like this,” he began, picking up his coffee cup and holding it out as a toast. “Shortly before noon on November 21, 1893, our world was graced with the presence of Erich von Lehrgen.” Tanya nodded, happy to have the information she needed, though the dramatic proclamation really wasn’t necessary. Sauer’s eyes caught hers and he gave a mischievous smile. “Don’t tell him I repeated this part to you,” he begged, then reassumed his in-character posture. “My first impressions of him were that he wasn’t nearly as cute as I was, he didn’t sleep enough at night, he became fussy too easily, and that he indiscriminately fell in love with any woman who’d open her blouse for him.” Tanya covered her mouth with a hand, wanting to smile when she knew she shouldn’t. She got the sense she knew where the joke was going. It didn’t feel right to laugh at Lehrgen for being a responsible adult. “I was very astute, for a four-year-old,” Sauer's rendition went on. “Thirty years later, my assessments still stand, with the exception of one.” He looked around at his captive audience of coworkers that shared the space. “Ladies, you’ll need to try a bit harder nowadays.” He gave a mock bow. “Fortunately for you, as previously stated, I’m cuter, and my standards are lower.” Tanya bit the inside of her lip to keep the laugh in. “Oh come on,” Sauer said, taking his seat again. “I can tell you thought it was funny.” “It’s unfair,” she said, opening her mouth and losing the battle she'd been fighting. “I wouldn’t want someone doing that to me in public. I feel bad enjoying it.” “Lighten up, Degurechaff,” he rolled his eyes. “I’m trying,” she protested. “Anyway, I’m giving you until the end of next month to make shady promises about what you’ll do for whoever turns over the most old books to you.” “Is that how you’re hoping I do it?” he laughed. “I’m just hoping you take it seriously so my friend gets some good things to read to all the kids of yours she’s probably putting to bed,” she sniffed. “You,” Sauer said, spinning his pen to point at her, “are not funny. I’m not going to give you any hints on what to get Lehrgen for his birthday.” “I’ll be fine on my own.” Sauer raised a doubtful eyebrow. She could sympathize with why he might be skeptical, though she was confident she could overcome the roadblocks he was envisioning. First off, time was on her side. She had four months to come up with a gift that showed an appropriate level of reciprocity. Second, it was no real mystery how Lehrgen had inferred she might like a non-utilitarian fountain pen to call hers. While it wasn’t an observation someone might casually make, in the end, all he’d done was observe that she enjoyed borrowing his pens, care enough to keep a mental note on it, and extrapolate from the evidence she’d unknowingly provided. As long as she put some care of her own into making note of his personal quirks, she should prove equally capable of the same. When it came to the question of what counted as an “appropriate” level of reciprocity, she had two distinct advantages. Being her boss, Lehrgen was in a position to know her income, know that it was less than his, and also know that she’d started playing the game of life with a big zero next to her name. He’d never given her a reason to doubt his intelligence, thus, she could safely assume he understood the concept of relativity. On top of that, part of Lehrgen’s reasoning for going above and beyond the usual for a coworker had been a desire to show he was putting his money where his mouth was. He wanted to keep her around as a lifelong officemate. Putting on a show of bravado that her fears of renewed frontline service were unfounded - all her future as his subordinate officer held was her using her mighty pen as her sword - wasn’t a bad sales technique. Tanya wasn’t on the hook for trying to bribe him back when November rolled around. All in all, she was reasonably sure she could find something to fit the bill: practical without being impersonal, and a happy marriage of cost and value. She said her goodbyes to Sauer and headed off to recruit the coworkers to her cause who were more likely to feel generous after being pitched by a soldier’s orphan than they were after imagining it might make Sauer come whisper sweet nothings in their ears. Recently, she’d worked on elevating her effort given to harmless smalltalk. She’d begun by making note of what she heard others chatting about, first mentally, and then on paper. She’d calculated it would be better to introduce an element of randomness to the process. Over-reliance on her mental notes would naturally bring her own biases into the conversation. Personally, when it came to talking to people she didn’t know very well, she could see herself sticking to topics she was more interested in, like inquiring about books or speculating about the stock market. If she limited herself to broaching whatever subject came to mind first, she wasn’t going to leave anyone thinking she was making a friendly attempt to relax the mood every so often. They were going to be left thinking she had some weird obsession with knowing a select set of facts about them. By the end of the day, most of the work she’d accomplished was hardly deserving of the term. Taking a five-hour nap might have been more productive. That wouldn’t have involved distracting anyone else. After hours, she had one additional personal project to pursue. Armed with both a key to the archival rooms and the knowledge that their guardian left his post the minute his time was up, there would be no witnesses to the trials and tribulations of picking up a new hobby. Frankly, she wouldn’t have chosen piano for the honor were it not for the fact that it was going to be resurrecting an old hobby, not forming an entirely new one. She was an avid listener of classical music. Being able to produce the sounds herself wasn’t much of a priority. That aside, there was something attractive to the idea that with a little practice, she'd be able to name another thing about her life that wasn't lost forever because some good-for-nothing couldn't handle going straight to the unemployment office after being fired like a rational person. As a child, she’d been given little choice in the matter. Her mother had insisted on enrolling her in lessons because she enjoyed playing herself. She hadn’t minded, particularly. She’d liked it better than sports. Comparing her hours of practice against the skill level she’d developed, there’d been nothing truly noteworthy in the outcome. Of course, to the average person, being able to play a handful of modestly ambitious pieces was impressive by itself. Ironically, by the time she’d been old enough to arrange her free time how she saw fit, she’d been old enough to see there was no use in wasting a perfectly good item for the personal interest section on her résumé. She’d never put in the effort to improving after she graduated high school, but she’d made sure to put her fingers to keys often enough not to get any worse. Clearly, she didn’t expect to retain much in the way of talent between lives. Her memory for reading music might remain intact. Her muscle memory for playing it was going to be gone without a trace. All the same, it struck her as worthwhile to attempt. Assuming she wanted some points of personal appeal up her sleeve, partial familiarity was better than nothing. She knew what she was supposed to be doing and knew how to practice effectively. As a bonus, the skill fit neatly under the umbrella of talents people expected women of a certain class to have. Finding ways to signal a willingness to fit in without simultaneously signalling she fit into harmful gender stereotypes had been a problem plaguing her ever since she got rid of her uniform. Her first order of business was to dust off the old thing. Once she took her seat at the bench, she did a few simple exercises to level-set. Aside from the process being more mechanical than intuitive, walking her fingers up and down the keys presented little difficulty. Hitting chords was a more troublesome affair. She knew from experience that achieving near-perfect unison would come as a by-product of normal practice. It was no reason to spend much time dedicated solely to correcting the issue. With that done, she flipped open the top of the bench to see what she was working with. Understandably, she found no beginner book courses lurking within. Her best bet for starting off was going to be paging through the compilation of Imperial classics she found. She could easily rule out giving a go to a piece she didn’t recognize. Knowing the rhythm and melody in advance was a serious advantage she wouldn’t have the luxury of passing up for a long time. Of the names she did know, she further eliminated any that contained complicated chord progressions or constant jumps from one section of the keyboard to another. From there, she made a random selection out of what remained and put her best foot forward. The initial results weren’t promising. Operating both hands simultaneously with reading was next-to-impossible. Crossing fingers over and under each other made them stumble. Any movement up or down that wasn’t incremental required an unacceptably lengthy reset period. At the rate she was going, she wouldn’t be finding the handful of achievable pieces she hoped were hiding in the book anytime soon. Her next method for culling down to the easiest of the lot was to restrict herself to the first line of each work and see how she fared on the sample. Her first breakthrough came when she turned the page on Bach’s Prelude in C. If memory served, it was the only performance-type piece she’d ever played perfectly on her first try. As a middle-schooler, she’d naively assumed it meant she’d crossed the line into mastery of the art. The repetitive notes and easy pace were aided by a structure that required only a single key down at any given time and movement that baby-stepped along the scale. Nothing else she found fit her needs quite so perfectly. To round out a miniature practice series, she selected the next best on the same metrics - one of Chopin’s preludes, Canon in D, and the inescapable main motif to Für Elise. Tanya figured she could swing down to practice twice a week for now. She’d shave some time off the end of her workdays Tuesdays and Thursdays, and the rest would come out of her downtime at home. If her boss noticed, she’d simply hold it out as a further attempt to take a more relaxed approach to her job. Friday during lunch, she traced a copy of the map Lehrgen had lent her so she could promptly return his back. There were a handful of hard-to-decipher personal notes that she debated transferring to the version she was making. Set on determining how useful they’d end up being if she could understand what they meant, she reached for her phone. “Degurechaff,” she heard on the other end a few minutes later, followed by a short laugh. “Finally, something I’m going to want to listen to.” Her heart skipped a beat in a slight panic. Somehow, it hadn’t occurred to her how utterly silly it was going to sound when she confessed she’d placed an international call and dragged him out of diplomatic affairs so he could answer some inconsequential curiosity of hers. “You sounded like you wanted an excuse to take a break,” she reminded him, a handy justification for the faux pas. “It’s not really that good.” “That’s alright,” he sighed. “I thought I could compete in the Olympics for sitting in on dry meetings, and I’ve come to realize I’m still an amateur. The fact that I get to talk at all will make this a hundred times more interesting.” It took barely more than two minutes to find the answers she’d been looking for. She couldn’t bring herself to hang up so soon. It was her responsibility to at least make her unnecessary call seem worthwhile. She’d already failed spectacularly at that on both the conversational content and cost-consciousness fronts. Seeing as she’d glossed over those by presenting her interruption as a convenient distraction for Lehrgen from his woes, there’d be no redeeming it if she failed to keep him looking busy on the phone for a sufficient amount of time. Talking with her would end up ranked below faking a trip to the bathroom on overall score. She was sure if he thought about, Lehrgen would find one or two interesting moments he wanted to go over with her. All she had to do was open the door. “Besides the slow meetings, how’s Londinium?” she asked. The analysis her question sparked took a different route than she’d planned. After giving a brief overview of his impressions of the city itself, Lehrgen took to comparing it to a few other national capitals. That eventually devolved into some back-and-forth debate on where they liked visiting best, or where they might like to live if work wasn’t keeping them in Berun. When it came to Europaen travel, Lehrgen’s knowledge was far more extensive. She was happy to hear some good opinions on where she should spend her next vacation. A second after hanging up, Tanya slapped her hand to her forehead. She’d entirely forgotten there’d been something she’d intended to ask Lehrgen if she’d been on the phone with him anyway. Her selection of foreign newspapers available for regular purchase was mostly limited to what might be termed flagship publishers. As far as weekly updates went, she was perfectly satisfied by that arrangement. She was able to get her information from a source that had a reputation to maintain. It left her missing out on the more colorful variety of opinions available from small papers. She wasn’t overly concerned about the ins and outs of the Commonwealth’s political or economic scenes, but it seemed like a waste not to use an opportunity to take a peek. She’d planned on asking Lehrgen to bring home a selection of whatever caught his eye. Knowing the fanciful hyperbole certain tabloids were given to, it might make for a fun exercise for the two of them to go through and have a good laugh before noting down it was a security concern that people actually believed that nonsense. Her hand hesitated over the phone. It had only been a minute. If she was lucky, she’d catch Lehrgen before he got back to the meeting room and had to be pulled out again. Logically, she should either call now or forget about it entirely. She decided she’d wait for Monday. He’d appreciate hearing her voice come to frivolously interrupt his day more if she put some distance between the two conversations. Calling now would make it look like she really did believe that faithfully reproducing unofficial maps of basements or discussing souvenir purchases were matters of grave importance. Using regular logic to dictate the best course of action for performing a task that itself was counterintuitive to regular logic failed to recognize it for what it really was - merely an excuse for him to talk to her. 




 

 I'm gonna try to tame your little red love machine






 
 "I have no objection to anyone’s sex life as long as they don’t practice it in the street and frighten the horses."
 
 August 9, 1931Eivissa, Ispagna Collective
 August was the worst month of the year. Period. No arguments. Anyone who wanted to argue with him about it was going to find themselves on the wrong side of an order from Supreme Command to repeat intensive P.T. in full uniform in the summer sun, and then they could tell him how they felt about August. August was so terrible humanity had collectively come to the agreement it was their favorite time to take a break from reality. Which was precisely why he, Erwin Romel, was at the beach. The correlation was obvious. The further south you went in Europa, the hotter and more horrible August got, and the more time people spent on vacation. He was a northern man. He could handle a break as short as a week. His wife was half-Ildoan, so he’d compromised with her at ten days. August was so bad it could even make them get along to face it down. This afternoon, he was going to visit Degurechaff’s alternate version of reality for a change. The boring budgetary details on her “continuing education” project had come together. Now came the good part. “Lucy,” he said, poking his wife’s sleeping form, splayed out carelessly on a towel beside his chair. She was just outside the reach of the umbrella, absorbing enough of the hot August sun for the both of them. “Wake up. Let’s have some fun.” She slapped his hand away listlessly. “We’re in public,” she yawned. “Stop bothering me.” “I just want to play a game,” he muttered. “And you complained all last night you couldn’t sleep because you’d napped on the beach too long. I’m trying to help.” She cursed at him in Polaskan - her other half, no wonder things had been rocky after the war - and rolled onto her back, squinting up at him through the sunlight. “What?” “I’m going to give you a technical specialty in the Army, you’re going to shout out what civilian might be good for filling it.” She still could do that damnable whip of her head, thick ropes of still-wet hair flying over her shoulder, that had caught his eye in the first place. The dark gray might have even improved it. It took a special person to hold onto that kind of spunk for thirty years. He was never going to be able to leave her. She needed to be the one to do it. “I want to retire as much as you want me to,” he grumbled. “Can’t take this damn job too seriously. But I’ve got to put in the plans who we look for if we have to call everyone back up.” If he wanted to, he could tell her the truth about pre-training the men they might need to officially call back up. Who the hell was she going to tell? The bridge club? The charity board? Most of their husbands worked for him. That whole world was in his palm. Lucy wouldn’t give half a damn one way or the other what the Imperial military was or wasn’t doing in the first place. She’d refuse to participate just to spite him if she suspected it was because he had designs on staying in the job. “You can’t call anyone up anymore, Erwin,” she said. She threw some sand at his foot for emphasis. “Stop dreaming.” “That’s not true,” he defended, throwing sand back. It was in his nature to retaliate against attacks. He couldn’t help it. “I can’t conscript for a standing army. No one was foolish enough to eliminate it for emergencies. What, are people going to invade me for conscripting an army because I need it to fight off the people that are invading? Let a man dream.” “If that’s what men dream about, men have stupid dreams.” “Fine, fine,” he conceded. “It’s stupid. I’m not dreaming about it. I just have to think about it so I can write it down and pass it off to the guy after me, alright?” With another curse - he’d made a lifetime effort not to learn the two languages she spoke as well as Germanian - she took her place in the chair next to him. “Alright, this one’s easy,” he said. “Detonations.” “Coal mining,” Lucy sounded off. He noted down the non-factual title they’d assign to the career training and gave her the next one. Building, operating, and servicing heavy vehicles became farm equipment maintenance. Imperial propaganda had been laughably bad the last time around. A filmography class was a must. Someone had a question about why there were so many theme park technicians all of a sudden? Simple, tourism was going to lead the Empire into the future. As the saying went, you could never have too many people who knew how to build a rollercoaster track and then convert it when the idiot manager bought cars that were too narrow to fit. Everyone knew what type of high schoolers signed up to do a bunch of math in a personal finance class on their own time. Nerds, that was who. Did the Army look like it was a place for nerds? The Army was a place for the boys picking on the nerds. And maybe it was the place for those budding little supersoldiers called mages. Romel was going to make them all wear fake glasses when they came to class. “Chemicals expertise.” “Beekeeping,” Lucy shot back. “...beekeeping?” “They wear the funny suits,” Lucy pouted. “And toxins are what makes a bee sting hurt.” “Beekeeping,” he nodded, smiling to himself. It wasn’t the worst idea Lucy had ever had. Maybe he’d surround their training facilities with angry bees. If you were snooping around and saw that, you’d have to be out of your mind to want to satisfy your curiosity. If his enemies were that good at hurting themselves, he wouldn’t have a job. As always, his enemies were dangerous, and numerous. After the month of August, it was the president of the Reichsbank, who probably liked August because the man never seemed to show the slightest desire to escape from his own economic reality. Romel thought the other man would be happy to see the military taking care of some of their own financing needs. They’d struck a lucrative deal with the Middle Kingdom that was more or less paying them to keep their equipment serviced and some of their men conditioned. Someday soon, Zettour was going to have the privilege of holding live war games for potential staff officers. Against the Communists, of all people. Romel was under the impression bankers were supposed to hate them. Schenk should be more in love with him than Lucy had ever been. The States had shipped the Imperial men and equipment over to the east and had stayed mum about it on top of that. That put them last on his current list of enemies. So maybe they’d only done it because the States wanted to get the Akitsushima Dominion involved in some kind of three-way war so they could take some islands in the Pacific. Romel wasn’t picky. Noble causes were a thing of the past. The Americans, at this point, were good friends diplomatically. That wasn’t the same as a friend you’d want personally. Just because he considered them an unofficial ally didn’t mean he’d make them the best man at his second wedding. Hell, he didn’t even care if they were allied with him at all. They were allied together against communism, or pro-American imperialism in other countries, depending on how you looked at it. That was what counted. Romel had passed along some overtures to the American leadership when it wouldn’t look bad, through a string of diplomats that always made him wonder if he was going to end up playing a bad game of telephone. They couldn’t get it too wrong. It was nothing more than a friendly reminder to the Americans that his longest border was with communist nations. Any support they could retract from an “independently” communist Polaska would help them both. Beyond that, the Army - thanks to its most loyal nonmember - had gotten the country’s favorite arms manufacturer ready to both stand on its own two feet and produce cheaper, smaller batches of whatever they wanted more quickly. What kind of economist didn’t love that? Just because they could use their improved capacity in ways that would decimate the national budget didn’t mean they intended to. It was only there for if and when they needed it. He’d heard Schenk himself talk about a dream of saving up a so-called “rainy-day fund”. He couldn’t blame Romel for wanting one of his own. A boy from his hotel came by, and Romel held up a hand to wave him over. Another of those Ispagnan wines wouldn’t do him wrong. He handed over a few bills. The expense wasn’t so bad, all things considering. He’d found a country that commanded a worse exchange rate than his. Romel leaned his chair back another notch. Schenk could dismount off his horse of the financial apocalypse whenever the hell he felt like it. That horse wasn’t saving his boots from so much muck anymore. There were worse economies out there to manage. In all probability, Schenk was soon going to be seeing lively numbers on his balance sheet once their Germanian Empire could count on a tariff-free link to the Mediterranean once again. For both their respective professions, it was a win-win. The Germanian economy could survive well enough on its own not to go to war in support of Ostria. In reverse, the Ostrians would need to be offered a hell of a deal to stand idly by while their patron state was dismembered, lack of officially-signed treaties notwithstanding. Since Romel wasn’t taking this job too seriously, he was going to mentally pencil in that he could order around Ostria’s military, too, if push came to shove. It would help him sleep at night, which would help him feel comfortable enough to retire earlier. Lucy would be proud. Maybe that was why he couldn’t bring himself to draw up divorce papers. He and Lucy would be like Germania and Ostria. They’d split up, realize they had more in common than they’d realized, try to make an alternative arrangement work, and make everyone wonder why they hadn’t just stayed married in the first place. “You sure this isn’t just to keep your office mistress satisfied?” Lucy asked, leaning over to peek at his notes. “He’d be willing to do more for me than you would,” Romel shot back. “And anyway, the wife would have my head for much more.” He didn’t know why he let Lucy get away with the pet names she’d assigned to Schleichel and Lehrgen. In her mind, they were the devil of what he wanted to do and the angel of what he’d promised to do. It wasn’t inaccurate. Only, he imagined both men would claim it was. Lehrgen would dispute that as the wife, the two should be better friends than Romel was with his mistress, if not better lovers. Schleichel would be offended that Romel didn’t hold purposeless belligerence towards the Federation as his sacred, avowed duty, which was what made Schleichel the mistress of the equation. Ahh, well. The wife was back from Londinium with a host of international accolades in his pocket. Maybe Romel could get a tank with them. He’d like a tank to ride around in. His mistress had been cautioned repeatedly that Romel wasn’t going to marry him. He’d expressed many a time that he’d like to live in a world in which Germania was going to lead the fight against communism. He’d also told Schleichel just as often that the world simply wasn’t ready to accept their love. And even if it was, the wife would try to put them all in jail for it when it was found out. Zettour might protect him from that, under other circumstances. The sly old trickster wasn’t so averse to making a few calls to the right people if he felt he had no choice other than to shut a potential tattletale’s mouth permanently. Romel had the stomach for a lot of dirty business, alright, but he wasn’t going to turn on a fellow career officer just so that years from now, some other man sitting in the chair of Chief of Staff got to win his war. He didn’t think Zettour had the stomach for it either. There was playing dirty against the worst and most devious of your communist sympathizers and there was playing dirty against your own people. And if there was enough ice in Zettour’s veins to turn on a fellow career officer, there was no telling which one he’d turn on. He also might as well decide Romel was the better sacrificial pawn and he’d give his blessing for the political class to make a show out of getting an old man who’d outlived his usefulness in trouble. There was nothing in it for Romel in tossing away his boring old routine as a dutiful servant to his vows. With a little fun on the side. Toeing the line was what kept dutiful vows from feeling unnecessary and irrelevant. Ask anyone who’d been married as long as he had. A man needed a little fun in his life to make it worth living. As the saying went, boys would be boys. 
 August 11, 1931General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 The summer evenings when it rained were Erich von Lehrgen’s favorites. The heat washed off the city like so much dust, whisked out and away through gutters and spouts and sewers until the temperature drew back below fifteen degrees and removed the stuffy blanket it had lain down over every bedroom it touched. Nights like the one tonight would be, he fell easily into sleep to the gentle music the rain played on his roof. He slept another thirty minutes the mornings he woke up to it too, the early sunrise delayed by friendly signal jamming. Humidity made his office windows stick and shake in their frames as he pushed them closed to keep the flat edges of the papers nearest to them from curling with the mist leaking in. Going home now would mean going to sleep hours before he should. Instead, he shut his door as well so he could pen a private letter. Elise’s birthday was in a month. Thirty-four was a rather unremarkable milestone, to his recollection. Only another woman could tell him whether buying her a piece of jewelry to commemorate it would make her think a more permanent adornment would soon follow. Marian would tell him the answer, and not tell anyone else, not even his brother. She knew as well as he did that whatever advice Otto had on the matter would only be good advice if you were Otto, and Erich would never be his brother in the ways that counted. It took what felt like an hour to try to explain. He wasn’t sure he managed it - he could hardly explain his ambivalence to himself. His parents had been gone long enough he’d lost any need he might have had to arrange his life around what would satisfy them in spirit. If love was the thing that made you feel like you could ignore all the rest, forever, and it wouldn’t matter, like you were in your own world - or maybe a world that wasn’t your own, because none of your problems were there - he was in it, deeper than he’d ever been. It was something like that which held him back. He didn’t want to ruin that world by merging it with the real one. He supposed it was the same fear everyone had to get over before they chose to make a life with someone else. Marian would tell him to do just that. Get over it, because it was trivial and quotidian compared to the existential threats marriage held for her. Like always, he signed only his first name at the end, and addressed the envelope with nothing more than hers. The exact destination at which to reach her was a question mark more often than not. All he knew was that she was somewhere in the Entente, maybe in Kristiana, maybe not. He stepped out into a hall darkened by the rain. There were three lights left on under doors now that his own was turned off: Wechter, Feldt, Degurechaff, the usual evening crew, nothing for him to check on before he took his leave. The letter he intended to drop off with the administrative room on the main floor. The girls there would call their sisters in Marian’s office for an updated address with less hassle than Erich would get trying to reach her boss. Henriette was manning the reception desk when he walked in, and it was too late to pretend he hadn’t made eye contact with her by then. He’d be stuck there for at least another half hour listening to her talk about what diet she was putting her cat on, or whichever other rousing topic she came up with for that week. As the minutes ticked by he inched out the door while she talked on, entirely oblivious to his slow disappearance. More than halfway there and glancing towards the freedom of the building doors, he saw a blonde bob going the opposite direction from the exit at the bottom of the main staircase. He suspected it was Tanya. He suspected he knew where she was going, too, and why. The other time it had happened, he hadn’t meant to follow her. He’d meant to pull her aside and ask why she was going down to the archives after hours. He’d given her the key so she didn’t need to explain her every whim to Herbert. Not to work on a project that was supposed to take months with her evenings, and definitely not to work on her own projects that suited her own whims. He’d trusted her; she’d betrayed him. He’d been going to ask for the key back. His footsteps on the way down had been loud and angry. At her, at himself for thinking that she’d changed enough to place a modicum of faith in, and at Klara - he’d been talking to Klara in the typists’ room across the hall - for keeping him long enough that Tanya’d had time to lock the door after herself. That had been the last straw. It had only been luck he hadn’t slammed the door shut after him at his proof she was up to something in the half second between getting it open and hearing the soft, faraway chime of piano keys. He’d shut the door as far as he could without the lock clacking shut. In slow, careful footsteps, as silent as he could make them with boots on, he’d wound his way through rooms and under thresholds and between shelves to find her. He’d gotten it right on his first try, that time. She’d never noticed him. He hadn’t stayed long. Only enough for her to make one round through the four songs she was practicing. It was impossible not to wonder how she was faring now after seeing how far she’d gone in barely enough time for the average person to grasp the basic scale. Henriette gave no indication she noticed his distraction. At the first moment he could, he extricated himself from the one-sided conversation they were in, in which he’d heard every detail of a life that would bore Elya to death and Henriette hadn’t paused long enough for him to say the smallest thing about the life of a woman who refused to be boring no matter how much he begged her to be. The remnants of the rainy August day disappeared as he descended below the building. In spite of the weather and its placement near the Spree, there was no smell of stale water or clammy air on his hands like there was in most of the city’s basements. It was why he’d never feared the place he’d heard referred to as the crypt. Over the decades, the lighting had been improved, bit by bit. Each era of the Empire had contributed a few of its own fixtures, a mismatched parade of styles strung up along the ceiling. The latest, which he supposed was his era, were nothing more than bare bulbs. Some not even wired to an electrician’s standard. The men who’d put them up hadn’t had time to wait for one of those to get rotated off the front lines. Every year, he put in to have the problem fixed so the place didn’t become a crypt in more than name. Poor Herbert would burn up with all their research. Every year, the budget for it had been rejected. At this hour, Herbert was long gone. His spirit lived on in the well-oiled hinges of the main door into the stacks. Like the last time, Lehrgen eased it nearly all the way shut after he was through. For every soft step he took, the haunting melody of a minor key grew louder. He paused in time to its mistakes, sped up when Tanya drove its rhythm forward confidently, slowed when it faltered, a marionette dancing along to Chopin for an audience of no one. It was immature, pretending he shouldn’t be there, when the only thing he shouldn’t be doing was acting like he didn’t have more right to be in the archives than Tanya did. With her back to him, he couldn’t see her concentration. He could hear it, though, in the annoyed expletives she directed at her fingers each time they tripped over themselves, in the impatient pace she ran through the parts she was better at, in the satisfied sigh she made when she finished a difficult section and her shoulders relaxed for a brief moment before she moved to the next. Her ability to focus on whatever she’d chosen to do had kept him up at night. Gotten her trouble more than once. Gotten their entire country in trouble. There was something enchanting to it in this instance. Maybe because she was trying, only trying, not being the best, only trying her best, trying so hard to prove something to no one but herself it felt sacrilegious to encroach on Tanya being the truest version of Tanya, fighting battles against herself when there was no one around to challenge her. In all his life, he’d never met someone who tried so hard at taking it easy. From Ernst’s reports of her approach to being charitable, she wasn’t letting out the steam that kept her going. Trying on a new outlet for it was good enough, for now. By the time she was done and had run five times through her Chopin, her Pachelbel, her Beethoven, her Bach, there was a question burning on his lips that only her own could answer. The last time he was standing in the same spot and watching her perform the same repertoire, it had been just after he’d been back from Londinium, barely more than a week after he’d put a key to the room in her hand. In that week, she’d gone from a five-note jingle to reading and playing real and recognizable music. In the two weeks since, she’d progressed to playing the same songs, marginally better. He could understand how her genius might not extend to musical talent; he could understand how it might. He couldn’t understand how it might be both. His knuckles knocked against the metal frame he was standing under when she took a break. “Degurechaff,” he called. Her posture straightened up in a snap of motion. Slowly, she turned her head, and that alone, the rest of her frozen in place like he’d caught her in the middle of a crime. “Good evening, sir,” she acknowledged, with a touch of nervous laughter. “May I ask how long you’ve been there?” “Long enough.” Her face flushed with color; her head turned back around. Fast-moving fingers plucked her book off the music rack to place it in her lap. She spun around on the bench to face him. “I was trying to work on something that wasn’t…” she gesticulated for a beat, “...work. I guess I shouldn’t be using something without asking.” “I’m not sure who’s even in charge of that,” he shook his head. “It’s fine. Very good, actually. I’m happy to hear it.” She looked down and bit her lip, hands splaying out over the book she was holding. “I was hoping to get more practice in before anyone heard me. Then they wouldn’t have to spare my feelings.” “I wasn’t.” Her eyes flashed in annoyance. “I know how many mistakes I made, so I’d rather not be lied to about it,” she sniffed. “I wasn’t performing for an audience. I don’t really mind that it wasn’t good enough for anyone to listen to.” She stood emphatically, then bent to return the book to the bench. “Paying customers at a concert hall, maybe not,” he told the back of her head. “Casual listeners don’t notice most mistakes, honestly. And forget about them quickly. You’re the only one keeping track.” An uncaring shrug was her only response. “All I’m saying is taking your mind off work doesn’t do much if you take everything else just as seriously,” he pointed out. “But it’s your hobby. Do it how you want.” “I will,” she replied blithely. She went to leave, flashing a cheeky smile as she passed him, her annoyance forgotten. “You can count on it.” “Degurechaff,” he called again. “One question.” She spun to face him a second time. The bag over her right shoulder slid down, and she let it fall. Under the harsh light hanging above her she transformed into a ghost, colorless skin and hair washed in white. “Regardless of what you think, you’re much better than I’d expect just yet. How did you learn so quickly? Teaching yourself, no less.” Her eyes went over her left shoulder and down; arms came up to cross tightly over her chest. “I’ve been practicing. Maybe if everyone else took their hobbies as seriously they could do the same.” “No,” he said, a single shake of his head given to dismiss the theory. “Am I not allowed to have an interest in knowing how you came into this remarkable ability?” “I guess I’m just a fast learner when it comes to music,” she shrugged, arms still crossed. “Alright,” he told her, holding his hands out in front of him. For reasons he couldn’t name, the hair-trigger temper he so rarely saw anymore had risen just beneath the surface, her body strung taught as a bow ready to release towards its target. He’d seen firsthand how stubbornly she could defend a position she was determined to hold. “I was only curious. I’m not trying to be bothersome. I just sometimes feel like the more I learn about you, the less I know. All I’m asking is to understand, a little.” Her posture relaxed some, except her hands. Those tightened where she still held onto her own arms. “I was just born like this,” she muttered. “I know you were born smart in ways I can’t comprehend, and try not to be jealous of,” he soothed, trying to tamp down the fire before he threw more wood on it. “The reason I was asking was because I followed you down here to tell you not to get ahead of yourself on your project two weeks ago. I caught a bit of you practicing. You’re better now, but it wasn’t an unrecognizable leap of progress. It felt like you went from zero to fifty in a blink, but fifty to hundred is going more like how I’d expect. It just didn’t add up to me, was all.” She leaned back, going half into dim lighting where he couldn’t read her expression. “Memorizing notes is completely different than learning to make your hands play them,” she said, voice crackling with finality. “I’m better at one than the other.” All that held him back from objecting was fear. Fear that he’d push her over some edge into examining parts of herself she didn’t like having to examine. She was the only one who knew how far down that went. He didn’t, maybe never would, maybe never wanted to. The answers she’d already found were bad enough. Nonetheless, the objection shouted in the echo-chamber of his head. If she was so good at memorizing information she could swallow a music theory book whole in a week, she didn’t need notebooks. She didn’t need to reference her notes. She wouldn’t make mistakes when she didn’t look at them; she wouldn’t have gotten angry when he took hers away. She wouldn’t have had any for him to take in the first place. “God works in mysterious ways,” he joked to her. “Blessing you with so many extraordinary talents and holding back a few random ones.” The anger flooded back into her posture, worse than before. When she leaned forward to grab her bag off the ground, her nostrils were flared, eyes alight, lips pressed into a thin line. Shadows danced menacingly over her face as she moved. “With all due respect, sir, it would be more accurate to say I was cursed,” she bit out. At that she spun on her heel and marched off to disappear behind a row of files. While he waited for her to get sufficiently far away before he did the same, he turned his last line over in his head a few times, searching for what had made the jest so offensive. He came up with nothing, nothing except a desire to go home and pick up a languished pastime of his own, cook a whole meal with all its courses like he had a family who’d be eating it with him, drown the questions itching at the back of his mind in cool rain and warm memories. Parsley was the one ingredient he lacked for dumplings - finely chopped sausage would do in place of ground veal, he kept eggs and canned fish and his bread was getting hard enough to crumble. He knocked on his neighbor’s back door and the housekeeper let him into the garden to pinch off a few fresh sprigs from her herbs as she held the umbrella to cover them both. Beneath his hands his knife rocked with a fluid rhythm. First the sausage, then the onion that made tears prick at his eyes while the smell of broth and vinegar and wine intermixed in the air above the stove they were heating on. In this instance, he was glad there was no wife, no children, to see him dab at his eyes with the back of his wrist. It was stupid - there was no reason to be embarrassed over it, except he wondered whether the type of woman who usually fell in love with a general in the army did it because she was looking for someone that wasn’t susceptible to giving into natural human weaknesses, and defeat at the hands of a measly vegetable would puncture the illusion. What he liked best about Elise, he thought, was that the first time they’d met he’d been ashen-faced and about to lose his lunch. No matter how many times he confessed to feeling sometimes inadequate at managing the many responsibilities the world had given him - he didn’t elaborate too much on what they were, that was their agreement - she didn’t say anything was wrong with him. She’d lift her head a bit, joke that since God liked to give him such a hard time he was one of the chosen people too, run her fingers through his hair a few times and remind him he’d be happier once he accepted his hands weren’t big enough to hold up the world on their own. But for now, there was no Elise, nor children for him to try to teach the lessons he had a hard time learning himself. The closest he was getting anytime soon would be when he handed over his childhood books he wasn’t reading to anyone. He was reasonably sure, as much as anyone could be, that he wasn’t personally liable for any of the fatherless children floating through orphanages. Still, more than one of them might be there because he'd signed a fateful order that ended one man’s life and not another’s. There was something strange about seeing Tanya do more to correct that aftermath of their war than he’d done so far. He paused, hands a mess, midway through forming patties, threads of an idea stringing together out of his messier thoughts. In a fair world, the men of the General Staff would bear the burden of adopting all the orphaned children they’d created. In a practical world, his fellow officers might at least be convinced to adopt a child for a day a few times a year. Children who weren’t geniuses driven by single-minded ambition would get the leg up they needed in the world - a person to take them out of their bleak reality once in a while, someone to teach them a few practical skills, a name to drop when it came time to get a job; soldiers would get to absolve themselves of the guilt of returning alive and some would get the very real reminder they needed of who else suffered the consequences of world wars, in case they fancied another. As he rolled his patties into flour and dropped them into simmering broth, details began to line up in his head. He’d put together far more complex plans than a program for matching interested parties together in his time, there was little imposition to doing it while he watched the pot cooking the dumplings and the one heating the cream for the sauce, stirring every so often, making sure neither boiled. It was the rain, he thought, that had taken him back to the summers growing up when every other day in August ended to its tune and fixed his mind around the long hours his family had spent around the dining table those nights with nothing else to do. It drove his thoughts inescapably around the subject of families, natural or otherwise, when usually it was so easy to tell himself that he didn’t mind having no family of his own to share the simple pleasure of being alive to eat a good meal with. Stomach full and the dishes done, he pulled the blanket up off the end of his bed against the cool, damp air drifting through the cracked window. Years past, he’d more than once been in bed early listening to the harmonious sounds of life and laughter filling the downstairs level because of people who didn’t have work in the morning, overpowering the background noise of the rain. He might one day hear them again if he took Elise’s advice and let life happen to him without fearing the consequences so much. 
 August 20, 1931General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 Ernst Sauer didn’t know why he did it. He didn’t know why he couldn’t stop. He was playing with the worst kind of fire, and he knew it. Tanya Degurechaff was sitting in front of him. She was on her way into a rant, and yes, Tanya, he knew he didn’t deliver back his comments on who she was staffing on her project by the time he’d told her he would. She still had a week until she needed to do anything with it. She just wanted it early. Ernst, on the other hand, was on his way to some kind of purgatory. Tanya’s rants were too sensible to argue with, unless you were almost as smart as her, and he wasn’t. When he leaned forward a bit, elbow on his desk, chin on his palm, smiling just enough to make whoever was looking at him interested in what it was about, eyes swiping down and back up like he was interested in what they were about, it was intentional. He did want to make her voice falter for a second, see her swallow uncomfortably, watch her shake her head a bit to reset. It was a damn defensive mechanism, and the only one he had to use against her. He was stuck in limbo between wanting it to be effective, and not wanting it to be too effective. A pretty face wasn’t enough to change his mind about her, and hers wasn’t the prettiest he’d seen anyway. Just like always, it got her to stop for that split second it took to knock her off her roll and make her decide she’d said enough. It was a great defense mechanism, so long as it didn’t give him something worse to defend against. Maybe it was him being an idiot, but he didn’t think it would. He’d caught her one day pestering Weber over some information on some politician in Bevaria he’d never heard of. Neither had Weber. He didn’t know if Elya knew it or not, but she did the same thing he did when he didn’t know how to answer Tanya’s questions. And he didn’t know if Tanya knew it or not, but she reacted the same to Elya as she did to him. He wasn’t as smart as Tanya, and the evidence was still easy to add up. She took everything seriously, she’d grown up in a church, she’d spent years around soldiers without any of them coming onto her. She didn’t know how to react when she thought it might be happening, simple as that. It didn’t mean she liked it. Judging by the fact that he’d just succeeded in scaring her away from his desk with it, Ernst would say she didn’t. As soon as she left, he got on the task she’d wanted him to do. She wasn’t so bad to work with once you got used to her. Very amenable to peace offerings. She’d wanted her list before her meeting, a week in advance, so that she could show Erich she was a week in advance and earn imaginary points. Ernst would knock on Erich’s door in a half hour and hand it over to her in the middle of that meeting, so their boss knew who to blame for it not being there yet - Erich wouldn’t care, he knew how Tanya set deadlines - she’d decide her point had gotten through without the lecture, she’d be happy about it, and things between them would go back to normal. If Ernst thought she might like him the way women usually did, he might want her to stay mad. She wouldn’t be the first girl he’d met that would take him or Elya or both. But he didn’t think Tanya liked him that way, really. She wasn’t nice enough to him, for starters. Anyone claiming that was a backwards sign of affection would then need to claim that Tanya intended to get more-than-friendly with everyone she’d ever met. There were rumors, sometimes, if you listened for them. Mostly in jest, and mostly about the people she’d spent the most personal time with. Sure, it was easier to read something between the lines in her relationships with Visha or Erich, but that was only because there were more lines to read between. Once he’d heard the rumor enough times to wonder if it was part of his job to figure out the truth, the answer had been obvious: if either of the two were Tanya’s goal, she’d be guiding herself at them as straight and fearlessly as she’d guided herself as a literal human missile that one time. They were talking about a woman who’d practically picked up her base commander by the lapels and thrown him across the room when he’d given her a no for an answer on a practical suicide mission to Brest. And the same woman was supposed to be shy about grabbing one of her closest friends by the lapels and asking if they wanted to get a room? Impossible. He didn’t know Visha well enough to joke about it with her, and he knew Erich too well to joke with him about the rumors he’d never heard because the man never bothered to listen. Not that either would think there was any more truth to it than Ernst did - both knew what her personality was like, too. Erich would laugh about it for a second, longer if Ernst told him over drinks. Over enough drinks, he might joke about it and sound just like his brother. Otto’s family had stayed in Berun for a few months back while the eastern part of the country was still being sorted out. Ernst had spent enough nights in the company of the two brothers to watch every drink they took make them more alike. Otto grew philosophical, Erich got gregarious, and somewhere around six or eight drinks they crossed the midline and became the other. With enough to drink, Erich would laugh, and say something funny - you’re right, I bet she’d love having me under her, or something like that. Then, the next day would come, and he’d be sober, and he’d overreact trying to individually tell every person in the whole country the joke was a misunderstanding about what Tanya wanted from him, and then it would seem like there really might be something to that idle gossip, after all. A tap on his shoulder took him back into the real world. Klara had come by to deliver what she’d typed for him. “What’re you daydreaming about?” “Degurechaff,” he said absently, thumbing through her packet to make sure all the pages were there. Klara choked, and quickly turned it into a cough. “Not like that,” Ernst clarified. “I was going to say.” “She’s friendlier than she used to be, though,” he defended. “Talks more.” Klara’s cough turned into a laugh. “What?” “Nothing, just...I think she keeps notes about it. The things she wants to say to be nice. I saw it in her journal once.” Ernst pinched the bridge of his nose, knuckle rubbing between his eyebrows. And Erich had been so pleasantly surprised to see her chatting with people. Now he was going to have to tell him it was just a machine brain trying to imitate human nature. On second thought, Ernst didn’t have to tell him. He’d already decided he was keeping secrets for his boss’s mental health. In the end, Tanya was trying to do better. He’d count it in her favor, since she’d declined to rant at him today. Because he was being nice, he finished up those recommendations for Tanya and walked them over to her. She was standing over a map spread out over both Erich’s tables where they’d dragged them together. He was standing on the opposite side. They both had their fingers down on different sections, and they were both trying to talk over the other. If it wouldn't get him fired, he’d permanently confiscate all maps in every room the two of them were in at the same time. They could go around for hours combing through each quadrant and have the time of their lives doing it. Wechter caught him shaking his head as Ernst left the room. “I’m already not looking forward to coming back in an hour or so,” Ernst sighed. “Him and Tanya will still be going at it over that map, and I’ll have to be the one to go tell them it’s time for the fun to be over.” Wechter laughed. “I know the feeling. My old commanding officer and one of his buddies used to argue themselves blue in the face over the field map like it was a sport.” “Not like this,” Ernst shook his head. He’d been working with map-obsessed staff officers long enough to know these two were in a league of their own. “Trust me.” 
 August 23, 1931Moabitte, Imperial Capital Berun
 As it would turn out, Tanya wasn’t the only person embarking on a musical learning journey that summer. The children living in the apartment next door to hers were so dedicated to practicing that they were up and at it first thing Sunday morning. Truly, she had things to learn from their work ethic. Lazy piece of trash that she was, she’d still been asleep when they began their rehearsal. The player on the pots got points for most inventive rhythms. Pans took the title for speed and agility. Lids led the pack in pure enthusiasm. Since it couldn’t be the concert she was being treated to, she blamed her headache on a lack of caffeine. There was plenty of that in her apartment. However, she hadn’t paid for a ticket to the show going on next door. As a firm believer in there being no such thing as a free lunch, it was evident she would have to extricate herself from the situation. Tanya didn’t tend to hang around her own neighborhood cafés during her Sunday afternoon outings. Being a working-class area, the cafés, and the newspapers in them, catered to political leanings that at best she didn’t share. When the weather was good, she enjoyed the walk towards the more fashionable parts of the city. When it wasn’t, the subway system had grown enough over her lifetime to take her anywhere she really wanted to go. This morning, she was merely looking to clear up a headache as quickly as possible. And she couldn’t confess to having zero interest in taking a look at the spot she’d noticed was the most popular nearby. Her fellow patrons might be communists, but they were Germanian communists. She doubted anyone would try striking up a conversation with a complete stranger. That would worsen the headache situation. The artistic facial hair decisions of the two men in line in front of her when she arrived didn’t do much to relieve her of her assumptions. Perhaps she couldn’t say with any certainty that they were communists. What she could say with certainty was that she and they took quite different approaches to life. She sat down at the counter and waited to be served. Happily, the person that took her order looked basically reliable as a human being. She was another woman about Tanya’s own age, most everything from her hair color to her height and weight was plain or average, and she hadn’t felt the need to make a statement by trying to change that. Her order was taken with the buoyant smile appropriate for people in the customer service industry. Like any good saleswoman, her waitress commented that Tanya was a new face and set about determining if she lived nearby. When the other woman learned that she did, the subtle pressure to convert her into a repeat customer began. Emma - that was her name - threw out a few compliments about Tanya’s nonexistent sense of style, asked if she could do anything to make sure she remembered her as her favorite waitress, and after Tanya tried to give an accurate report on exactly how strong she liked her coffee, Emma went so far as to let her know her work schedule. Regardless of what her politics might be, Emma at least understood basic business concepts like working for financial gain. The trust Tanya placed in her for it ended up being a good bet. The coffee that came back to her was as good as what she got in the city’s most expensive locales. As a waitress, Emma’s only problem was an issue of clumsiness. She’d needed to physically touch hands to make sure the cup didn’t spill when she passed it over, and she’d practically grasped them to make sure she didn’t drop the cash Tanya gave back. To pass the time while she sipped away at her drink, Tanya grabbed some reading material off the shelf. She was guaranteed to be entertained by the lies the communists were telling themselves this week. Simultaneous with receiving her second drink, she found a passage so delusional that a laugh escaped from her throat. Some author was going off about some recent shake-ups in the Federation and had crossed into a fantasy world while describing how successful he expected them to turn out. Imagining the look on the man’s face in another decade or two when he realized the truth was doing wonders for her headache. Emma glanced curiously at what she Tanya was reading. After ascertaining she had no other customers waiting to be served, Emma leaned over the counter towards her. Very close. She must have found it freeing to think that as a female customer, Tanya wasn’t going to take some friendliness the wrong way. Emma rolled her eyes when she saw what Tanya was looking at. “You know,” she said, barely above a whisper, “for leftists, most of the guys writing this stuff really aren’t that concerned about building a truly good society. Just one that works best for the new men in charge.” Tanya raised her eyebrows, shocked at the revelation. “I’m with you,” she said. “But I’m surprised you’re working in a place where most people would disagree.” “The town I come from isn’t one where it’s easy to be girls like us,” Emma said, with a self-conscious laugh. “I didn’t know how to tell my mother I didn’t want to go and settle down with a man.” “Tell me about it,” Tanya said, with a contented sigh, glad to have found some decent company. Clearly, it wasn’t hard to guess from her pants and button-down that marriage was about the last thing on her mind. “I needed a job,” Emma shrugged. “This place was hiring. I wish I was doing something more important, but it pays the bills.” Frankly, Tanya was impressed. It took a true commitment to capitalism to happily profit off of your communist customers with as little cognitive dissonance as Emma displayed. Emma had unconsciously relaxed her stance at finding someone else in the café that wasn’t half out of their mind. She’d brought her arm across her ribs and leaned further over it, pushing her rather modest cleavage out of the top of her blouse. Would it not have come off as wholly inappropriate, Tanya would advise her to try that with her other customers in order to extract a few more Marks. “What was your name, again?” Emma asked after a moment. Tanya took a look around. It wasn’t the type of place she wanted to be identified by her real name. Emma would never know the difference. “Gretchen,” she lied, using the pseudonym she’d come up with the summer before. Emma glanced at her empty cup. “I hope you’ll come by to visit me again,” she smiled. “Ah, well, I have a hard time with commitment, you see,” Tanya joked, her indiscriminate coffee consumption being somewhat legendary as far as she could tell. “You won’t give me a chance to change your mind?” Emma winked. She did a good job of play-acting her hurt feelings. “I’ll be back through sometime,” Tanya promised, flicking an extra coin her direction. It was rare to find someone in her profession so talented at pretending the only customer she cared about was the one in front of her. Returning home, she hoped to find a quieter household. Typically, she blocked off an hour or two in the morning for improving her Françoise. She hadn’t yet reached the point where she knew enough colloquialisms to lend her voice to song lyrics, which unfortunately meant that a musical accompaniment would be unnecessary. To their credit, the children were no longer making noise. Just the adults. Resigned to the fact that she’d need to wait until the arguing passed to crack open a book, Tanya took to doing the next-most-productive thing she could think of: checking some deep-cleaning items off her quarterly list. The energy she put into focusing her mental state on what her hands were doing instead of what her ears were hearing translated into energy focused on the chore itself. Between that and the fact that she kept her small space in good condition, she was done before the fighting was. As much as it was possible for an office-worker, Tanya had tried to maintain the cardiovascular endurance the war had given her. There was no time like the present to take herself on a long jog through the city. The weather was good, and she wasn’t particularly put off by the thought of the curious stares that would follow her. She ended her route in the nearby park that Lehrgen had discovered for her some months back. A few calisthenics made up her cool-down routine, after which she planned on laying in the grass and watching the clouds until she was positive even the most acrimonious of marital disputes would have run its course. “What team do you play for?” The interruption to her stretching came from a fellow runner heading her direction. The reason he’d interrupted had to be because of the outfit she was wearing. Athletic clothing for women didn’t much resemble the athletic clothing she was used to. What the average department store sold was clothing designed for women, and then adjusted to account for making exercise more comfortable. What it should have been was clothing designed to make exercise comfortable, keeping in mind that the intended wearer was a woman. Tanya had found some more utilitarian options browsing a second-hand shop. As a side effect, she was now wearing a cast-off from someone who’d once been a member of a sports club. Presumably, they special-ordered their uniforms to be more suitable for serious exertion. Currently, she was wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with some unknown logo. “I don’t,” Tanya replied, with a shake of her head. “It belonged to someone else originally.” She wondered if that was the only reason the man had come to speak to her, or if it was meant as an icebreaker. Potentially, he was looking to acquire a partner who could both keep up with him and preferred being off the repetitive loop of the running track. Worse, he was hoping to acquire her as a different sort of partner. While Tanya waited to see if he had anything more to say, she sized up her competition. On account of the fact that she was wearing shorts, she was pushing the limits of what it was appropriate to wear in public as a woman. Different standards for men notwithstanding, she took note of the fact that her companion’s outfit wasn’t any better. To start with, his legs were making quite the showing. His shorts were shorter than hers were, and bright red to boot. The cut of his tank-top as it scooped around his neck and shoulders was low enough to leave little of his chest to her imagination. Where her T-shirt covered her shoulders and nearly half her arms, his were left bare. She imagined the heat of summer wasn’t the sole explanation for the immodest attire. No doubt he enjoyed the attention from having women wonder how firm the muscles in those arms would be if they reached over and felt them. Whoever this guy was, he’d probably get along great with Lieutenant Sauer. It was altogether too easy to see Sauer changing into something similar, and for similarly bad reasons, the moment he was off the clock. Picturing it gave her a bit of an uncomfortable feeling. Sauer was a coworker, and thus a representation of the entity she worked for. It went without saying that she wasn’t enthused about the idea of her place of employment being associated with such dissolute behavior. “So,” her interlocutor said, raising an eyebrow and giving a laugh. “Should I take it you’d like to get drinks sometime?” Tanya was unable to prevent herself from going slack-jawed in shock. She’d heard tales that this occasionally happened to women. She never expected it to be so blatantly out-of-the-blue. She’d done absolutely nothing to make this perfect stranger so self-assured that she might want to go out with him. All she’d done was be receptive to one innocuous question. Apparently, he’d assumed that since she hadn’t turned and fled, her mildly friendly attitude indicated she must want more from him. It felt like a bad joke. By keeping her focus on him until the conversation ended - otherwise called not being rude - she’d earned a possible first date, with a side helping of sexual harassment. The presumptuous confidence and total lack of social awareness drove her desire to take him up on the offer from zero down into firmly negative territory. At least she didn’t have to feel obligated to let him down easy. “You shouldn’t,” she said simply. In spite of catching the confused expression on his face before she turned around, she didn’t take the time to explain. She didn’t owe him a second more of her day. Thankfully, the apartment next door was silent when she returned home. She wasn’t sure she could have prevented herself from joining in on the anti-Geri group project otherwise. The unfortunate truth was that when it came to her neighbors, her hands were essentially tied. Given their demonstrated lack of emotional maturity, at best going over to knock on the door would do nothing. At worst, they’d vindictively decide to bother her more. Her landlord was likely to be of no help. No official rules were being violated, which gave her little recourse for lodging a formal complaint. Worst coming to worst, she’d have to end up moving to escape them. It was a shame. Her building was fairly new, well-located for her commute, and built safely. The real shame was that it was still half a year until her lease was up. xXx CUTE. Cute. Cute. Cute. Cute. Cute. Cute. Gretchen was cute. Emma Krause was finishing up her shift at the Rotes Tür café. Gretchen had left five hours ago. A minute hadn’t passed without Emma wondering when she was coming back. Cute. And smart. It wasn’t like Emma didn’t adhere to communist philosophies, or something. She did. Of course she did. She’d come to Berun to get involved in the party. And find someone besides that one other girl the next town over. Hedy’s breath had smelled. But mostly she’d come to get involved with the party, which she was doing. Well, like, she volunteered to hand out leaflets every week. It counted! It was just like, most of the contemporary commentary Emma read was leaving out one teensy-weensy piece. Most of the writers - men - wrote like they’d solved all the problems for all people. Not that Emma disagreed they had good solutions for solving inequality between men. They totally did. But women were people too. Solving inequality for men didn’t automatically solve it for all people the way they seemed to think. They never really asked, either. She wasn’t saying communism wasn’t better than capitalism at it. Like, no. Just look at the Federation, or her own country. Political revolution to the left had opened up opportunities for women in both. The men at the café said very nice things about women’s rights. But if those know-it-all customers that talked all day every day kept their mouths shut for a few minutes, which would be nice for a change of pace, Emma wasn’t sure they treated her much better because of it. After God knew - or, well, she maybe wasn’t supposed to say it like that anymore - after who knew how many customers she’d seen reading that pompous article by Ziegler praising the Federation for closing the women’s department in the commissariat, Gretchen had been the first one brave enough to laugh. Cute. And smart. And brave. There were special clubs where ladies could come in wearing suits. Gretchen could do it in broad daylight on Sunday morning and pass by all the grandmas on their way to church. And pull it off like she’d been doing it her whole life. Emma hadn’t been entirely sure the pants had meant what she hoped. Usually it was safe to assume. Usually, except it was a big city. You could get it mixed up with leftist women who did it as a symbolic anti-traditionalist gesture. None of them had ever gotten offended when Emma mixed it up. She hadn’t mixed it up with Gretchen. Like, she’d made a joke about it to make sure she wasn’t mixing it up this time, and she wasn’t. Actually, Gretchen liked girls so much she couldn’t pick just one. Yet, Emma told herself, taking her apron off and looking over herself in the mirror. She couldn’t pick just one yet. 
 August 27, 1931General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 The slow and steady click-click-click of Erich von Lehrgen’s stylus pressing numbers on his calculator clashed with the soft, measured tick-tick-tick of his clock, discordant, disharmonized and out-of-sync. He stopped and removed his glasses again, rubbed at his forehead like it would do anything to relieve the dull, aching pain behind his eyes. The hot evening sun sending gold beams through the window and beads of sweat down below his collar was no help. Nor was the irony that there was a paper sitting on the top of his tray announcing the Imperial Army’s plan to offer a personal finance class. If only. He’d enroll, were it true. His time was more his own than it used to be. The backlog of personal duties he’d been ignoring for half his adult life had finally caught up to him. He undid the buttons on his jacket and threw it over the back of his chair, then the top few on his shirt - there was no one around left to see - and picked up the glass of water ruining his desk with its own perspiration to roll it along his forehead for a few seconds before he gulped it all down. The ring of his phone sent sharp needles into his skull. It was his private line’s light that was blinking. Reviewing his investments would have to wait, as they had been since he inherited his half of what his parents left. Longer, actually, if he went back to before, when there were fewer of them, and he’d handed it all off to someone at his bank because he’d been twenty-eight and had another job to do. “It’s me,” Elya’s mellifluous voice reported. “Your personal investigative service.” “You know I wouldn’t ask if I didn’t think I needed to,” he retorted. “You need to learn to be less suspicious of your coworkers,” she said. “Most people are boring. They aren’t up to anything, and don’t want to be.” He picked his stylus back up. Decisions would have to wait. The calculations he could do without needing much concentration. “A few months back Romel decided it would make less paperwork if he gave us all a longer leash,” he said. “You know Schleichel doesn’t think we’re doing enough to prepare for the next war. You know why I’m asking.” His stylus tapped away, tallying up the numbers on the bottom of each statement. “What are you up to?” Elya asked. “I’m the one asking you what other people are up to,” he joked. “No, I mean, I can hear you’re doing something else.” “My calculator,” he laughed. “I’m trying to get a handle on my investments. It’s harder than I expected. There’s too many of them.” “What a tragic and difficult life you must lead,” she said, and he could hear the eye roll she was making through the phone. “I’m serious,” he complained. “It’s a lot of work. Now, please tell me figuring out how to get Schleichel removed isn’t going to give me even more work to do.” “Let’s see then,” Elya hummed. “He’s rolling out a project to keep more non-enlisted men up-to-date on some of the most technical roles.” “I know that much,” Lehrgen said. “They do keep me informed about some of what goes on around here.” “You don’t think they keep you informed about all of it?” “Would I be talking to you if I did?” he laughed. “We’re all hiding things here. I just haven’t figured out what’s being hidden from me. Silly to assume that means there isn’t anything.” “Maybe you only want an excuse to talk to me,” she shot back. He put aside his bank statements. The papers he lifted off the top of his tray had other numbers he needed to consult. He read them off to her, one by one. How many men they planned on training in each specialty at any given time; proposed budget and proposed locations. With some small variations to account for expectations meeting reality, his official, classified numbers matched the information she’d pulled together. “See?” she said. “I told you. Schleichel’s nothing to worry about.” “He and Romel have been friends as long as I’ve been alive,” Lehrgen sighed. “It’ll always be something to worry about. Romel’s going to be inclined to do what his friend wants, and Schleichel’s going to do whatever he thinks Romel wants.” “Yes,” Elya said, giving a long-suffering sigh back. “And since they’re friends, Schleichel apparently understands perfectly well that Romel doesn’t want him taking too many liberties.” “I guess.” “Romel’s dealing with his warmongering subordinate better than you are yours.” “Hey,” he defended. “That’s not fair. Mine started off a lot worse than his.” “Visha tells me she came and showed off some pen you got her. I hear she keeps it on her. Takes it home every night.” “She’s projecting,” he chuckled. “She likes borrowing mine for as long as I let her get away with it. Of course she assumes other people will do the same to her.” Elya paused for a moment before replying. “It’s an awfully expensive present to get a girl that you’re only messing around with and teasing that you’ll commit to her.” “Elya,” he muttered. “Don’t put it like that.” “I’m putting it how it is,” she said, tone dripping with effrontery. “You should tell her the truth. It’s not nice to play around with a girl’s heart.” “Weber,” he warned, headache worsening at the flippant comparison of Tanya’s unconditional adoration for war with something so innocent. “What?” she huffed. “Since you’re so incapable of helping yourself, I’ve tried dropping her a few hints she’s not going to get any further with you. She shut me up the other week, like she didn’t want to hear anything else that conflicted with this little fantasy she’s got going.” “Weber,” he snapped, this time harsh and loud. Tanya’s fantasy that he wasn’t teasing about committing to helping her get further along on her detestable goals was the entire foundation of their professional relationship, and all the progress he’d made with her because of it. He needed her firmly ensconced in it. “Cease and desist. That is an order from a superior officer. I’m dealing with her my own way. How is none of your business.” “Let me talk to Visha about it,” she begged. “Visha might know how you can set her straight without setting her off.” “No,” he said, rubbing at a temple. “Serebryakov might be your friend, but she’s Tanya’s friend too. She’s not going to be able to keep this a secret from her. Please, Elya. I need you to be my friend here.” “And as your friend, it’s my duty to tell you you’re insane for thinking this is going to end well. She’s already eighteen.” “I know, I know,” he sighed. His internal clock was too aware already of the fact there were now less than two years before he could no longer handpick what information Tanya saw and what duties were assigned to her. “But I’m handling it. You don’t need to involve yourself. Alright?” “Alright,” she agreed, drawing the word out in a sing-song to make a final objection. “I hope you handle your other investments better.” That was all she gave as a goodbye. He wandered off in search of more water, then wandered further through the empty office as he drank it. Signs of age were beginning to crop up without the money they used to spend on keeping it an example of the country’s martial orientation. Wallpaper was peeling off here and there. He spotted more than one window that needed to be replaced. The rich red carpet running down the length of the main staircase was worn through in the center and curling up at the edges as their seams frayed. His hand reached into a pocket to check if he brought his keys along. Their sharp ridges greeted his fingers, a key to his front door and the one to the back, one to the locker where all his family’s old rifles lay in wait to go along hunting with sons he didn’t have, a key to his office door, another to the drawers and cabinets inside. It was the archive room’s key he was looking for, larger and heavier than all the rest. Maybe it was the chance he’d prove Elya wrong that sent him down the stairs. Maybe it was only the knowledge that the air down there would be several degrees cooler to stand in while he waited for the headache to recede enough for him to restart his calculations. He went no further than the inside of the vault-like door that divided the entrance from kilometers worth of shelving. The sound of music floated softly in the air around him, just loud enough to distinguish the song, and no more. The paradox remained - he didn’t need to see Tanya to see that her hands weren’t flying over the keys yet - in another two weeks, all that had changed was she’d added two more items to the list she cycled through. His headache told him it would get better the less he thought about it and the more he listened to the tune of changes Elya wasn’t convinced by. He intended to finish his initial review of his finances by tomorrow evening, which meant he had more to get through tonight. He had weekend plans. There would never be a reason he needed to learn to sail a boat. He’d never own one, never compete in races, never circumnavigate the globe, or even the Mediterranean. That was the joy of it. It was something he’d wanted to learn his whole life. Too much of that had been taken over by what he needed and not what he wanted. Every Sunday since the weekend he’d declined his invitation to join the Garden Club he’d gone out west of his neighborhood to the marina along the Wannsee. He enjoyed it, when he got the mechanics just right and the wind pushed and the lift pulled and the water flew beneath him. He enjoyed it all the same when he didn’t, and at worst he could only fall into warm and welcoming water. Being bad at it was easily as fun as being good, so long as he didn’t care how many summers he’d spend learning. He didn’t. His investments would pay for as many lessons as he wanted. In a few minutes, he was walking out of the basement with a smile on his face. The headache was gone. Almost. “Wechter,” he greeted, passing the man by in the main hall. “Still here?” “I could say the same for you,” Wechter laughed. “I don’t think I’ve ever seen someone come out from the crypt smiling.” Erich waved goodbye as Wechter went out the door and he returned upstairs, turning around to give his response. “Then they aren’t using it right.” xXx Fridays were everyone’s favorite day of the week. That was, unless you realized you hadn’t finished everything you’d intended to get done during the work week. Then you wished there was another day. There was a pretty simple solution to dreading your missed deadlines come Monday. There was another day. Two more, in fact. There were nights, too, if you really needed them. Tanya was no stranger to working on the weekend. Statutory time off was crucial for long-term job performance. Actually performing well at your job was quite a bit more vital for it. With the comings and goings of officers taking their leave during the summer, she’d overestimated how much could be accomplished. She was working on a project that she’d initially been the one to propose. She’d long suspected that a full review of policies and procedures was overdue for the General Staff Office. While she was aware of the disdain that the average employee had for what most modern companies considered a yearly practice, her time in HR had taught her to respect it above all else. Because the Imperial Army schooled its officers to the same standards, they thought it gave them room to play fast and loose with the written documentation and double-checks. Maintaining consistency throughout an organization over who did what, and how, and then communicating it clearly to all was the bedrock on which a corporation functioned. Predictably, Lehrgen had been baffled at her insistence that this was a necessary dotting of the Is and crossing of the Ts. Her good rapport with him had allowed her to escape with no more explanation than several affirmative answers to various iterations of the Degurechaff, are you sure? question. Once she’d gotten him on board, he’d jumped in with both feet. Knowing the quantity of work she was undertaking, he’d assigned a second person to play Architect of Corporate Policy with her. Major Gustav Wechter was one of her most competent coworkers, so she’d been happy to have him. That said, she occasionally got the sense that he was pulling double-duty as a babysitter who’d sound the alarm to Lehrgen if the exercise began to look like a waste of time. As the policy and procedure review was sensitive to the presence of the right people being around to review their group’s policies and procedures, the summer scheduling had been unkind. Tanya glanced around her desk at the work still remaining before their end-of-month due date, then looked across to Wechter. From her conversations with him, she’d gleaned that he had a wife and children at home. She had the benefit of arranging her weekend time use to best suit her. He had other people to think about. Ultimately, it wasn’t her problem that he’d chosen to trade career flexibility for a family. Their relationship was as coworkers. There was no reason to cut him any slack, especially if it negatively affected her deliverables. Normally, she would have no problem telling him she expected to see him bright and early Saturday morning. This one time, she might be able to keep them both happy. She and Lehrgen both knew that the deadline they’d worked out was somewhat arbitrary. By choosing not to work overtime to meet one arbitrary goal, she’d be racking up achievements towards another. “I’ll let Lehrgen know we’ll need more time,” Tanya offered. Wechter raised an eyebrow. “You sure it won’t be better to just get it finished over the weekend?” Tanya nodded. “He thinks I’m too focused on working. He’ll like that I asked for the favor of an extension. It’ll be a win-win.” “How?” Wechter asked, furrowing his brow. “Mutual disarmament, or something like it,” she said with a small smile. “He needs a distraction from work more than I do, but I don’t mind helping. If getting me to loosen up every once in a while lets him destress, it’s silly not to take advantage of it.” Wechter looked away for a moment and blinked a couple times, like he was remembering something, then eyed her up and down critically. “You being a young woman wouldn’t have anything to do with this, right?” His expression had landed on one of displeasure. Undoubtedly, he was offended that it sounded like she was the employee Lehrgen had chosen for special treatment. There was a natural, if disappointing, tendency in most people to first blame forces outside their control for their failures instead of admitting that the other person might have simply worked harder than they did to earn the success. Tanya was somewhat taken aback by the accusation that she was taking advantage of her age or gender to make her boss feel badly about enforcing deadlines on her as strictly as he might on older male employees. Wechter knew what she’d done during the war. Truthfully, the thought that it might be the reason behind Lehrgen’s request hadn’t crossed her mind. “Well, that probably has something to do with it,” she admitted, with a frown and a shrug. She had to contend with the fact that her behavior might stand out as more noticeably atypical because it didn’t fit in with expectations. “But it certainly isn’t everything. If I’m being singled out, it’s because I’ve proven I can make the sacrifices I need to in my personal life for my career.” “You shouldn’t have to make any personal sacrifices if you don’t need to,” Wechter offered, stretching out a hand like he wanted to put it on her shoulder and then thinking better of it. “Not for my sake. Maybe we should just stay here all weekend.” “Staying here all weekend is a much bigger sacrifice,” she pointed out, with a little laugh. She wasn’t going to let Wechter convince her not to take an easy opportunity to show off her ability to give herself that space to breathe her boss wanted to make sure she possessed. “All I have to do is swallow a bit of pride. And the bad taste in my mouth asking for a favor might leave.” Wechter blinked a few times as he nodded his understanding to himself. Still, he appeared to be undergoing an internal struggle with the decision. “You’re really sure you’re okay with this?” he finally asked. “I mean, you aren’t afraid of being fired or anything, right?” “Not at all,” Tanya sighed, to assuage Wechter’s anxiety that their boss would react so impulsively to a missed deadline when it was caused by an employee he could fire outright without going through the process of a dishonorable discharge. She gave a small smile. “Like I said, the whole idea is to make work a happier place for the both of us. My main worry is that someone else could accuse me of being unprofessional for it.” While this goal hadn’t been one she’d set for herself, she was starting to see some major upsides to the unusual demand. All things being equal, she didn’t want to work over the weekend. Under most circumstances, the choice came down between doing something you didn’t want - working on the weekend - to avoid something you wanted even less - harming your career. In this case, she didn’t have to choose. Lehrgen had so far proven himself an honest player. Any boundaries she’d pushed he’d been game to relax. It made it so she really could enjoy the slack in the rope without being worried it was looping around her neck to hang her by later. “That’s...good,” Wechter said, shaking his head to himself. “I won’t say anything, if that’s all that’s bothering you about the whole situation.” “I guess I’m supposed to be more personally invested in the whole idea,” Tanya mused, thankful to have found a willing ear. “I know Lehrgen would like me to be. It’s not that I dislike taking my mind off work and relaxing, I just feel the most relaxed when I know I’m doing everything I can for my career. In the end, I’m thinking with my head, not with my heart.” She shrugged. Her career wasn’t so far along yet that she could afford to let her personal whims make decisions for her. It was a minor complaint, all things considered. “So on that note, I’ll go ahead and ask for that extension.” “Right now?” Wechter practically shouted, on edge despite her assurances. “As long as he isn’t slammed with work, it’ll be easier to get it over with. It’ll only take a few minutes.” Tanya gathered up her belongings and headed off to see Lehrgen. She wasn’t particularly nervous about his reaction. She couldn’t say the same was true for Wechter. “You’re really going to march right in on into his office and…” “I’m a big girl now, Wechter,” she said, rolling her eyes. Like she’d observed, he’d cast himself as something of her babysitter without her permission. “I’ve got it handled.” She poked her head through Lehrgen’s partially open door. Stacks of books greeted her. Lehrgen was on the phone, but waved her inside. “I’ll let you know how it goes,” she promised Wechter, shutting the door behind her on his still-skeptical gaze to give Lehrgen some privacy from hallway traffic to finish his phone call. He wrapped it up shortly. As expected, he was perfectly amenable to letting her and Wechter enjoy their summer weekend time without a deadline looming over them. For her trouble, she earned two extra weeks. “Are these all for me?” Tanya asked, taking a look around at the books piled along one wall. “For your orphanage, yes,” he said. “My library was already overflowing. I took it down to what fits without cramming. This is what had to go. I was thinking it’d be easier for Sauer to drive it all over. You’re welcome to join if you aren’t busy after this.” Tanya nodded her assent. Curious what sorts of children’s books a man like Lehrgen would have, she walked over to the section containing them. When she opened the inside cover to check for a publication date, what she surmised was a childish version of her boss’s handwriting was there to greet her. Despite the lettering being in many ways neater than her own, it had a distinctly immature style. The effort behind making it look formal and adult was obvious - nothing like the elegant lines that flew effortlessly into his notes now. It made the words almost easier to make out: Given to Erich von Lehrgen, December 24, 1904, by Konrad and Dorothea von Lehrgen. Tanya turned over the cover of several more. The same informational blurb jumped out at her, with the exception of changing names and dates. “Were Konrad and Dorothea your parents?” she guessed. Their names had appeared the most frequently. “Grandparents,” he answered, with a small frown. He stood up and walked over to take a look. “Oh God.” He slapped both hands over his face with a laugh. “I forgot I used to do that. There was a stage around eleven or twelve where I thought it made me seem very grown up to have little dedications. I went through and did it to everything I owned.” She smiled at the endearing image of a miniature and ultra-serious version of her boss pretending to be an adult. It likely shared some similarities with the impression she’d given people seeing a child attending War College. She wasn’t the type to get sentimental reminiscing over the past too much and wanting to cling to possessions that helped her do it. She was well aware that she was somewhat alone in that. Trying to get the books returned if and when Lehrgen decided he’d been overzealous in parting with too many memories would be a pain. Not to mention it could be nearly impossible and then become a potential point of resentment between them. “Are you sure you don’t want to keep some?” she asked. Given that he’d gone to the trouble of dedicating them when he’d been a child, she could see it being the type of thing he’d want to share with his own children down the line. “We won’t be able to get them back if you want them for little von Lehrgens one day.” To be honest, she was shocked by how shocked he looked that she’d brought up the subject. It wasn’t an abnormal line of discussion between coworkers, from her observations, but his stunned and unsure demeanor was giving her the idea he must specifically avoid those types of talks. Tanya put a hand to her mouth in utter embarrassment. She’d done Lehrgen the disservice of assuming that in the case he didn’t want children, he would have felt as free as her old self had to be honest about his ambivalence towards the topic. Upon reflection, that wasn’t necessarily the case. In modern Japan, her previous status as a childless bachelor hadn’t received much in the way of commentary for being unusual or particularly undesirable. In the Empire in 1931, excellent candidates for fatherhood still lived under the onus of constantly explaining to society why they hadn’t lined up to run the race. Inadvertently, she might have touched on something he was tired of having to justify to everyone that mentioned it. “Sorry,” she apologized, clearing her throat. “It was wrong of me to assume you’d want children in the future. Plenty of people don’t.” “It’s alright,” he said, cracking an amused smile. “I would like children, if it gets there. I held back anything that was really important to me.” Tanya cleared her throat again. Presumably, he’d simply been surprised that as an orphan, she was sympathetic to the nostalgia parents often had when they shared their own experiences with their children. Hoping to gloss over the awkward subject matter, she took herself over to the pile of regular adult fiction. The way things were looking, Erna was soon going to have better things to read than she did. “I’m guessing you didn’t read all these this summer,” Tanya joked. She turned her head to let her eyes roam over the evidence that he hadn’t been cooped up in his house anytime he wasn’t in the office. The touch of color to his skin suited him well. “You look like you’ve been out in the sun.” “Much more than usual,” he nodded. “Finally.” “I might want a few of these for myself,” she murmured, running a finger along the spines of the books in front of her. “Degurechaff,” he lectured. “Taking books from orphans? That’s not nice.” “I’m one of them,” she shot back. “And it will mostly be the sisters reading the real literature.” He rolled his eyes, but laughed all the same. “Take what you want. You’re doing enough that you’ve earned it.” Her problem was, she had no real clue what it was she wanted. Most of the titles were unfamiliar to her. She picked up the first book. “Short synopsis?” she asked, tilting her head in question. “Bring them to the table and we’ll go through them,” he smiled, still shaking his head at her. She’d have to remember to thank Wechter for getting over his fear of Lehrgen’s wrath when they asked for an extension. She’d gotten two favors out of the bargain. xXx What. The. Helllllllllllllllllllllll. It was the only thought Gustav Wechter’s brain could summon as he paced back and forth in front of General von Lehrgen’s door. The end of the day had come and gone without Degurechaff coming by to tell him if he could leave or not. Those “few minutes” had turned into nearly an hour. He’d gone by her desk just now to see if she’d forgotten. She wasn’t there. And General von Lehrgen’s door was still closed. That freaking door was still freaking closed. Was he supposed to report this? It wasn’t illegal. The relationship wasn’t against any office rules. They weren’t advertising it enough to be charged with unbecoming conduct. He really wanted to report it. Someone had to care about what they were doing to the furniture. Right? Right?? No, he would definitely report it, except...except. Except he couldn’t tell who in this freaking mess was taking advantage of whom. Which one of them was he even supposed to report? Both? Have both his boss and the Army’s strongest soldier out to get him? If it was under any other circumstance, he’d report it. He would. He was a good man. He liked Lehrgen, but you couldn’t just let this slide on by with no comment like you approved, which he most definitely did not. Any other woman besides Degurechaff. Degurechaff, though...Degurechaff? Her personality? It was about two hundred thousand times easier to picture her looking up one day to say Hey boss, I’ve got a trade deal I’d like to run by you than it was to see it the other way around. Lehrgen was no shrinking violet, but like...was any man really that brave? Putting aside that Lehrgen wanted to have a relationship with a subordinate who was at least a decade too young for him - it was a lot to put aside - still, putting it aside, wasn’t it better that he wanted Degurechaff to seriously consider a relationship? His intentions at least had some redeeming qualities, which was more than could be said for hers. It was fun, and she could capitalize on it, so why not play with a man’s heart in the process? Yeah, why the hell not? he asked himself. He could be at peace with it. Enough to act normally around them. He could do it. Degurechaff was one of his better coworkers. Tough, but her heart was in the right place. She was tough on you because she wanted you to be better. Lehrgen had already promised to take him along to his social club’s meet and greet next Christmas. Gustav’s wife had agreed to let him go. They had three kids. They both knew they could use the extra money from a promotion some personal connections could earn him. Yeah, he was almost as bad as Degurechaff, wasn’t he? Always thinking about what he could do to improve his damned career. Seriously, how long were they going to be in here? Was it that map thing Sauer had mentioned? Anyway, wasn’t Sauer the real victim here? He was the one that had to see it. Gustav only had to hear about it by chance. He got it now, why Lehrgen wanted to keep himself looking young. Or why Lehrgen had walked out of the archives last night with a smile on his face and his shirt partway undone. Gustav had seen Degurechaff go down there about an hour prior. Why the basement, even? Obviously they saw no obstacle when they could shut the door in the middle of the work day. He wanted to know what more they could be getting up to down there. Scratch that. On second thought, he did not want to know what was going on down there. Lehrgen had joked about no one being able to hear them. While looking at her. Saying it was something special for her birthday to let her run wild. Yeah, he was better off not knowing. Or thinking about it. “Wechter?” he heard, from his left. “Did you need something in there?” Sauer was looking at him curiously, head cocked to the side. “I need to ask Degurechaff if I’m clear to leave, but…” he drifted off to stare at the door, then dragged his eyes back to Sauer. “I didn’t want to interrupt. Not sure what I’d be walking in on, you know?” Sauer checked his watch. “It’s probably fine,” he said, giving two quick knocks to the door and opening it enough to lean his head in. Poor Sauer. He even knew their schedule. “You two need better hobbies,” Sauer’s muffled voice laughed. “Anyway, Wechter wants to know if he’s good to leave.” Gustav couldn’t hear the reply. Sauer paused for a moment, and then spoke again. “You want me to drive you where?” Another pause. “Alright,” Sauer called, “come get me after you’ve cleaned all this up.” He brought his head back into visibility and shut the door again. “You wouldn’t have interrupted them hard at work,” he said, shaking his head with a laugh. “But I guess they’d have liked that even less. She says you can go. They’ll be out soon, I think. I told you, I’m the perpetual killjoy. Me, of all people.” Ahh. Someone needed to give Sauer a promotion for dealing with this bullshit. Gustav went back to his desk. Degurechaff had said he could go home. Still, he couldn’t go straight home after this. He’d sworn himself to secrecy at work. He wasn’t going to pollute his wife’s mind. He had to tell someone. A psychiatrist? The bartender after a few stiff drinks? Both? Both. Please let Jakob’s shift be over soon, he prayed, asking the operator to connect him to his friend that worked as a psychiatrist over at Charité, who he was going to beg to drink the night away with him. “When are you done?” he asked, when Jakob picked up. “I was about to walk out.” He paused, and Gustav thought he put his hand over the receiver. He could still hear the muffled voice calling Lise, are you doing anything tonight? before it came off. “Why?” “Did you really just try to get a date first instead?” Gustav asked. “This time it’s for real,” Jakob complained. “You always say that about your nurses.” “No I don’t,” he shot back. “And I’m being serious. She’s the serious type. I have to be serious.” “She probably said no because you aren’t the serious type,” he laughed. “Shut up. I’m trying to make my mother proud. You know how much she wants me to marry another member of the tribe.” “Sounds like we both need a drink,” Gustav sighed. “Meet me at Trinkteufel as soon as you can.” Did the two of them really have to be there? Did they? Standing on the curb right next to each other, casual as you please, right after they’d got done with whatever they were doing and Gustav had got done packing and using the bathroom and slapping his face with cold water to fix his stupor? He was going to have to wait for a cab right next to them while they waited for Sauer to take them wherever the hell they were going. Degurechaff whistled through her teeth as a bright red car passed. “You like that?” Lehrgen asked her. “You don’t?” “I can’t drive,” he shrugged. “I’ve never cared all that much. You?” “I can drive alright,” she said. She had the audacity to wink at him. “Next birthday?” Lehrgen laughed. “And how do you propose you’re going to earn it?” A cab showed up. Thank whatever fucking God existed. He didn’t have to hear the details of Degurechaff’s plan. Jakob better already be at the bar. With a drink waiting for him. 




 

 Now here is a riddle, to guess if you can






 
 "After the first glass, you see things as you wish they were. After the second, you see things as they are not. Finally, you see things as they really are, and that is the most horrible thing in the world."
 
 
     
 
 September 5, 1931Warszaw, Polaskan People’s Republic
 
Artur Zamojski was a businessman. A real businessman, mind you, that owned mines and factories and the pockets of more than one politician, not just some measly storefront proprietor. Artur Zamojski had a family. One that he loved, and they loved him, so he had no time for risking his life. Artur Zamojski was an Imperial citizen, and perfectly proud to be one. There might be some other citizens who’d look down their noses at him because his name didn’t sound like theirs, but the state treated him the same as every other citizen, and that was all a man could really ask from his government. Artur Zamojski, therefore, shouldn’t be where he was, preparing to listen to some subversive communist nonsense. He was there for one reason, and one reason only: Arthur Zamojski was Polaskan by virtue of birth. As was Józef Bros, the man sitting across the table from him in the basement of an abandoned factory, pouring him a drink and making a few slices off a loaf of bread and block of cheese with a knife he’d pulled out of a pocket, like he was some Medieval peasant. Five years ago, their shared heritage hadn’t been their only tie. Józef had been a businessman, too, a real businessman. What business a real businessman had in turning communist was a question Artur had been dying to ask ever since it happened. It was what he was there to find out, so he could go back to sleep at night knowing it would never happen to him. Józef finished off the poor man’s meal with a cigarette, one for himself, one offered to Artur. He took it. God knew he needed it. “So,” Józef began, leaning back in his chair. “How’s life these days?” Artur was getting older, as one did. Old enough to want to enjoy what was left of his life, and old enough not to care it had added a few kilograms to his frame. The dim, flickering lights above them weren’t preventing Józef from noticing that for himself. Artur getting older meant his children were, too. The youngest had just left home. Józef knew how years worked well enough to guess that on his own, too, unless he’d forgotten how all numbers worked in the process of getting rid of his understanding of money. “Same as it used to be,” Artur shrugged, reclining into the back of the chair himself. “Unlike yours.” “Making plenty of money, then,” Józef said. Artur paused as he reached for a slice each of the bread and cheese. Hungry as a slavering wolf in front of a wounded animal, Józef had always been, for money or power, you could see it in his eyes. It was what had made him such a good business partner, once upon a time. Being on the receiving end of that predatory gaze was what was worrying Artur now. “Yes,” he responded honestly. Artur had turned down plenty of supplicants, in his time. He didn’t want to turn down Józef, for the simple fact that Józef wasn’t normally content to take no for answer, but there’d be plenty of excuses to turn him down without Artur needing to get caught in a lie about his financial position. “The Empire’s never lacked demand for our raw materials, and now that everyone’s over themselves a bit, the rest of the world’ll buy our finished products again. It’s getting back to what it used to be.” “Looking for investment opportunities?” “Subsidizing your government because they’ve run out of money isn’t an investment,” Artur laughed. “My government, maybe, but not yours.” “I’d like them to be the same thing.” “I’m not immigrating.” “I’m not asking you to,” Józef tossed back, ripping into a slice of bread and swallowing his bite before he went on. “I’m asking you to invest in the future of an independent state.” Artur sighed through his cigarette. The Polaskan intelligentsia loved the idea of a nation-state they could control, always had. Businessmen like himself, or Józef in a former life, were supposed to be more practical about following the money. “My business is doing perfectly fine under Imperial governance. As would’ve yours, if you’d stuck around.” “Is that so?” “I’m telling you that it is.” Artur reached for his drink. A spot of fortification was in order when disagreeing with Jozef was involved. “I should think I’d know how much money I’m making.” “Everything’s gone back to how it used to be, then?” Józef asked, razor-sharp smile a touch smug for Artur’s liking. “One nation, one people?” An unhappy grunt came from Artur’s chest unbidden. Before the war, the Empire’s peripheral populations had been happier to be Imperial, back when it meant progress, wealth, and power unrivaled in Europa. Before the war, the Empire’s core Germanian population had been happier to accept that meant money needed to flow to people who hadn’t been with them since the beginning, who had different languages and customs. Before the war, life had been different. The state’s only error had been in losing the war. Not the simmering discontent that came after. A sensible man should see that. “We lost a war and went straight into the worst recession in living memory, that we’re only now climbing out of,” he reminded Jozef. “It’s little wonder everyone’s been a bit tense. Things are getting better. It’ll go back to how it used to be. You’ll see. And you’ll be the one missing out when it does.” Dark eyes squinted at him across the table, calculating, cold, so cold the temperature in the basement felt like it dropped a degree or three. “I think all I’ve missed out on is being on the wrong side of the Empire annihilating another enemy,” Józef said, taking a long draw off his cigarette. Drink to his lips for a second taste, Artur paused, the chill he’d felt earlier sinking into his bones. “We’re the victims, this way,” Józef explained, spreading his hands. “A territory mostly full of wannabe-Imperial citizens that the Federation sent a few bad actors into so they could steal us away at the end of the war. There’s communists everywhere making trouble. Berun, Bavaria, you name it. Not our fault we had them too. But a province that almost went to the other side during a war? Wouldn’t matter if we didn’t end up doing it. Look at me honestly and tell me you think they’d be treating us the same as before if we’d stayed.” Artur’s hands drummed along the paunch of his stomach. On one hand, official policy hadn’t changed towards the remaining majority-Polaskan provinces in the wake of some going to the other side. On the other hand - on the other hand, he was a businessman, and businessmen had to keep a wide focus. Cheap and easy short-term solutions made for headaches later. If he’d ever wondered whether the Imperial leadership agreed with him, he’d gotten his answer when they’d sunk Europa into a war unilaterally, thinking they’d get away with erasing their northern border. You couldn’t trust people like that to see the bigger picture. Maybe they’d only been lucky there were more convenient people to blame Imperial suffering on for the moment. He’d seen how far his country would go to uproot an enemy. There was no pretending they’d held anything back. The eyes he raised to meet Józef’s couldn’t tell the other man anything honestly. Maybe the continued benefits he’d enjoyed as an Imperial citizen were nothing but a turn of good luck, maybe they were the result of foresight and good policy, maybe, maybe maybe, a man couldn’t run a business on maybe. “I suppose it could have gone differently,” Artur admitted. “But it didn’t. And hasn’t.” “Yet,” Józef said with finality, draining his cup and setting it down on the table with just enough force to make a point. Józef never had been a man for maybes. “And thanks to us. The traitors who left so you could be the good ones who stayed. They were going to see us as traitors one way or another. Better to commit to the label and make sure they can’t touch us than throw ourselves on the generosity of people who were hurt and angry. Still are, some of them.” “So you threw yourself on the notorious generosity of the communists towards the bourgeoisie instead,” Artur shot back, finishing his own drink and pouring them both another round. For a couple seconds, Józef’s hearty laugh, deep, all the way from his belly, was his only response. “They’re plenty generous to class traitors when it suits them. Don’t let their idealism fool you.” “Still,” Artur protested. “It had to be the communists?” “Didn’t have a choice,” Józef shrugged. “And for the most part, they let us be as independent as they claimed we were going to be in that fancy document with all the signatures. They even let us rig our own elections.” Despite himself, a bark of laughter escaped Artur’s throat. Józef hadn’t changed, not really. He was as bad as ever. Artur lifted his glass in a silent toast to his friend’s success. “That’ll change one day,” Józef ruminated. “Maybe when Stalyn’s finished collectivizing all the farms and asks why we haven’t gotten around to it. Maybe later. Either way, I’m as suspicious of their long-term generosity as I am of the Empire’s. Or anyone else’s. Being friendly is useful until it isn’t, that’s the way it’s always been.” “So this is the part where you ask me for something,” Artur chuckled congenially. “Make us useful as an independent state,” Józef replied promptly. “Really independent. The more the world worries about the spread of communism, the less they’ll let us become a de facto part of the Federation. That way, when the time comes from a counter-revolution, it stands a chance.” “When will that be?” “Whenever the rest of the world is sufficiently fed up with communist revolutionaries and they’ll concern themselves over getting rid of them in other countries,” Józef sighed. “The Federation’s been bothering their own people ever since the war ended. No one cares about that. We’ve got to keep attention on international power balance concerns.” “And so?” “Orbs can’t cross borders without someone realizing. You have money on your side of it. I can make sure purchases don’t trace back to you.” “I can only get my hands on civilian-issue,” Artur protested. “Even if I wanted to do more.” “Would you have believed the feats the Imperial mages got up to were possible, even with top-of-the-line technology, before you heard of them?” Artur shook his head. He tried to keep an open mind about the mages he employed. Truth be told, it had never sat right with him that they became the ones who were really in charge the moment their hands touched an orb. “You think while everyone’s been so concerned with what the best orbs can do they’ve paid much attention to what a man who really knows his craft can do with a weak one? I owe a big thank you to whoever it was in the Imperial Army that showed us the established limits on what an orb could do were more a lack of creativity than anything else. We all grow up told you can do this and not that, and turns out, most people are willing to accept it as gospel instead of finding out for themselves.” “How bad is it?” Artur asked urgently, his viscera protesting that he needed to confiscate orbs from his employees before one turned on him. “Only bad enough to give people a scare,” Józef mollified. His second drink ended its life in much the same way as the first. “Nothing more. You can still kill the fuckers with a regular pistol if all they’ve got is civilian issue.” “People on my side of the line are going to get hurt if I help the nationalist cause,” Artur reasoned. “And for what?” “And this from a man who has a plan for how his grandchildren’s grandchildren are going to make their money,” Józef shook his head. “An upfront cost for long-term viability is all we’re talking.” “Long-term viability for you,” Artur said, pouring Józef a third drink as he nursed his second sulkily, himself. “Not necessarily for me.” “I’ve made sure I’m only powerful behind the scenes in my new country,” Józef said. “That way I can play midwife when my new new country births itself, without reeking of old blood. I won’t forget my friends. Think of it like an insurance policy for if you get on the wrong side of the Imperials.” In the first place, it was Józef asking him to step on the wrong side of the Imperial government. Artur could see that as plainly as he saw that Józef was right, and no matter what he did, he might end up on the wrong side one day anyway. It was Józef’s gaze burning a hole through him - greedy, boundlessly greedy, for whatever he could squeeze out of life if he wrung its neck - that scared Artur more. He’d chance being an enemy of the Empire sooner than a personal enemy of Józef’s. The man’s knowledge of generosity was limited to the exploitable generosity of others. He’d become friends with Józef because he’d feared the alternative. There were some things the God he was still allowed to pray to had fixed as immutable facts of the universe. Maybe he’d be sorry if he helped Józef. He couldn’t run his business on maybes. He’d definitely be sorry if he didn’t. “I’m not taking out a loan for your sake,” he cautioned, pouring himself a third and fourth drink in one go. “But I’ll see where I might reinvest profits elsewhere.” Like the hungry wolf he was, Józef licked his lips. Then, Artur did what he did best. He got down to business.   
 
 September 29, 1931Oppel, Imperial Province of Oberschlesia
 
In the quiet of the city after midnight, a lantern flashed twice out the window of an abandoned factory. Thirty seconds later it flashed again, three times this round. It was the signal Tomasz Kostyszyn had been waiting for, the reason he'd stood half the night in the cold, heart pounding in his ears, tucked between two trusses of a soon-to-be demolished bridge. The waning sliver of moon in the sky provided little light, making him practically invisible to any nighttime passerby on the nearby embankment, a reassurance he'd repeated to himself several times over the course of the night. Too fearful that lighting a cigarette would give away his presence, he'd occupied himself by picking at the flaking paint of the beams, sprinkling it into the water beneath him as he went. As soon as he'd confirmed the transmission, he quickly ran his way along the track to land, wincing at the clop his boots made on impact with the pavement. He waved to his compatriots huddled under the abutment on the left bank of the river. Rushing to reposition, all in attempted silence, wires attached to detonators attached to explosives were unfurled, the men gaining a safe distance from the bridge before igniting them. No sooner had they reached the locations marked on their maps than the lumbering of an approaching train could be heard, brakes screeching as it slowed in preparation to stop. It was the last train of the day, arriving shortly before midnight, a military transport containing nothing but material used by their oppressors to keep control over the local population. A united, independent Polaska, Tomasz reminded himself, rubbing the picture of his grandfather he kept in his pocket for good luck. The old man was surely smiling down on him tonight, a star twinkling in the night sky, his dream so close to being realized. He fixed the image of the stern face in his mind, remembering the gnarled fingers that had patted his head and turned pages in stories, three missing from the left hand, lost in the January Uprising, almost sixty years ago now. He'd fled to safety in the Empire, which had welcomed him so long as he understood he was Imperial first and Polaskan second. First came the sound of the explosions, loud, the type that reverberated in your chest. Then the sound of weakened bridge supports giving way to gravity, an awful shriek of protest as metal twisted and tore, so piercingly unearthly Tomasz was sure his ears would never recover, that the same noise might be heard in the depths of hell, the cry of a chorus of tortured souls. He wished he’d been in one of the groups that had needed mages to supplement their explosive power. He could have blamed the unnatural phenomena on them. Not wanting to wait around long enough to watch the fate of the train, he fled and faded into the darkness in search of the agreed-upon rendezvous point. Upon arrival, he was handed a small glass of Łańcut and a round of Na zdrowie went around the room. He threw the drink back, disappointed that his first, and likely only, taste of expensive wódka was in an unheated basement, tossed back the same way he treated the cheap stuff he could afford. The ringleader of the group clapped him on the back, a solid strike that Tomasz had to hold his ground against. "Relax," the older man suggested. "All we can do now is wait. If we're lucky, the next thing we'll hear is a call come through that the other groups were just as successful." "And if we aren't lucky?" "Police boots and gunfire," he said, with a shrug at the thought, as though it was something to be taken lightly. Tomasz gulped, wishing someone would offer him another shot. The conversation going around the room faded into the background, his ears now keenly attuned to the sounds of the street above him. Quietly, he mumbled out a prayer, asking that the first sound they heard be the chime of the room's telephone added to the boisterous meetingplace.   
 
 September 30, 1931Outside Zelle, Imperial Rhineland
 
Clamorous, cacophonous, clanging, the ring of a telephone sliced through the crisp night air, the sound carrying so far it could be heard at the other end of the house, whose occupants had, seconds before, been soundly asleep. By the time a servant knocked at the door to his bedroom, Hans von Zettour had already slipped his arms through a heavy robe and made his apologies to his wife. A call at such an indecent hour could only be for him, unless the local knitting circle took itself far more seriously than required. This had better be an emergency, he groaned internally. If it isn't, I'll raise enough hell myself to make it one. His days of being awoken in the middle of the night to tend to his country's ills were supposed to be in the past. He still pined for his days in the General Staff Office, but this was one part of it he had been glad to bid farewell to. Muscles and bones achy with age and oncoming winter had him walking stiffly down the hall and to the stairs. He refused to lean on the railing as he went. He'd been a life-long soldier, and until the very last he intended to hold his back straight and head high, unyielding to the discomforts of growing old. In near-total darkness, the moon providing little in the way of light through the windows, he made his way down to his office and found the telephone. He drew in a long breath and let it out, then picked up the receiver. "Yes?" he grunted gruffly at whoever was on the other end. Sleep lent an edge of harshness to his voice he hadn't intended, but didn't altogether mind. No one bothering him just before three in the morning, rousing him from the comfort of warm blankets, deserved a pleasant greeting. "We have a situation in Oberschlesia," his caller, whom he quickly identified as his successor to the role of Chief of Staff, grumbled back at him. "That's your job, now," Zettour yawned, feeling his dog brush against his legs. Still half a puppy, the Veimaraner must have been curious over what had her owner up and had come to investigate, wondering if it was already morning and time for breakfast. He reached a hand down and stroked soft ears, his own interest piqued by Romel's words. Still, he would've been happier to read about it in the morning edition of the Allgemeine Zeitung. That Oberschlesia was given to riots and protests whenever the police dealt heavy-handedly with the local population wasn't news to him. As soon as a handful of troops were sent in, order was restored and life resumed its normal rhythm. A plebiscite had been held recently. The cities had voted to remain with the Empire, the countryside voting against. The greater population of the cities had won, and Imperial Oberschlesia would remain. It was no surprise there was unrest in the aftermath. "My hands are tied unless we want to chance a skirmish with the Polaskans near the border," Romel countered. "It's not a few malcontents breaking windows like the last few times. There's three rail bridges out, and every half hour I get notice another communication line is down." Zettour's weariness began to drain away, replaced with an agitated rumination on the possible causes for and responses to this newest political development. A keen mind needed sharpening every once in a while; it wouldn't do to have his go to pasture just yet from lack of use. He'd have to send a thanks to whoever was organizing the Polaskan resistance. "To international eyes, sending in the entire Army is going to look aggressive," Romel continued. "A few of those sympathetic groups you keep in your pocket, though...might be they have some men at their disposal." "Might be," Zettour agreed, stroking his chin and looking up at his clock. "I'll be on the first train to Berun." He hung up and stretched, the adrenaline coursing through his veins loosening his muscles and making him feel ten years younger. Retire by choice he hadn't. This was the sort of work that got his blood pumping, the reason he had to keep going instead of declaring his intention to live out the rest of his life in his favorite chair. He reached under a fringed lampshade to turn on the light, illuminating an office so full of papers he had to forbid the serving staff from touching it. His wife refused to come in the room, the disheveled mess impossible for her to look at without stressing about. A veritable monument to the power of entropy, there was a familiarity to the chaotically stacked papers that allowed Zettour to pull out the ones he needed almost instantaneously. Dietl, Niehoff, Schlageter...I think that'll do, he thought, as he began to scribble out notes to himself on which former officers would be the most useful in directing members of their volunteer units according to whichever plan Zettour helped devise to put down the rebellion. The existence of the Freikorps was officially forbidden but impossible to enforce. Their numbers exceeded the size of the official army, so they had to be tolerated, by both the Empire and the nations responsible for forcefully demobilizing so many men at once. If you can't beat them, join them, had been Zettour's philosophy when it became apparent that paramilitary forces were to become a fixture of the political scene for the next decade or so. Most of the men commanding them were used to taking orders from Zettour, so it hadn't been difficult to recruit a few of them into an unofficial Army. When the clock struck five, Zettour threw a few things in his bag and called for his driver, who deposited him at the station just as morning broke. A few hours later, he was stepping foot into his old office, a number of familiar faces greeting him, the flashes of silver and gold on their uniforms marking them as the highest-ranked and most dependable officers. "Well, gentlemen, down to business," Romel instructed as he strode into the room, the last person to enter. The chatter died down at his instruction. Zettour felt a pang of pity for his old colleague. The face which had retained a youthful boyishness well into middle age was now serious and deeply lined, and though in a certain light Romel's hair still looked blonde, when he turned it was clear the close crop had mostly finished its progression to a steely gray. "Freinitzer, what's the latest?" The 8th Division, headquartered in Breslav, was the closest to Oberschlesia, and its commander cleared his throat to speak. "Seven bridges destroyed in total, outside of Oppel, Kreuzberg, Kanderzin, Oberglodau, and Schientochlowitz. All important lines between Oberschlesia and the rest of the Empire have been compromised. It'll be difficult to get any men in that aren't already there." A collective groan went around the room, but it was brief, the men returning to a collected calm. The news wasn't good, but it was no reason to panic. Everyone there had been briefed on worse in their time on the General Staff. "The work is well-coordinated, nothing like what we've seen in past strikes and riots. Three of the bridges show signs of having been destroyed with magical assistance. We aren't sure how, but orbs must have been smuggled in." A flurry of shouts went around this time, the group growing disorderly. Currently, the Empire had neither mages attached to the Army nor military-grade orbs. They'd be at a major disadvantage if the Polaskan rebels had either, to say nothing of how concerning it was that they'd been able to sneak orbs past the detection equipment installed at every port and border crossing. They were one armament that was impossible to disguise, the mana imbued in them during their making enough to trigger the machines designed to alert the customs officials they needed to check a shipment. These days, it wasn't only the Empire ensuring that nobody brought in dangerous weapons without their permission. In the north by the Commonwealth, in the east by the Federation, in the south and west by the Republic, Imperial borders and border guards were observed, foreign agents guaranteeing strict compliance. Airports were monitored, and aircraft not departing from or landing at an officially registered destination would arouse immediate suspicion. Building orbs from raw materials in secret was similarly impossible, the goods and machinery required too specific and too easily traceable. "Coordinated by whom?" Romel asked, holding up a hand to tell the other men to quiet down. "Has to be the Federation," Lieutenant General von Kresslein muttered, and Zettour heard variations on that sentiment echoed by several other officers. "To the best of our knowledge," Freinitzer stressed, "it's the Polaskan Intelligence Service." "As I said, the Federation," Kresslein retorted, tone laden with sarcasm. "A few prisoners have been taken so far, and based on our interviews with them they're fighting for an independent Polaska, not for the Federation. Most of them aren't even a part of the Communist Party. Could be this is the work of the Polaskans only. If they added the industry in Oberschlesia to their country, it would make them less dependent on the Federation. Easier for them to declare full independence one day." "Hmm," Zettour hummed to himself, the situation reminding him of a conversation he had with one Tanya Degurechaff a few years ago, back when the Empire had the upper hand against their eastern neighbors after she'd figured out the Federation's ethnic minorities were fighting to defend their homeland, not the country itself. I wonder what she'd have to say about this, he thought. His eyes found Brigadier General von Lehrgen, who looked just as stressed as ever, chewing on a lip, staring out the nearest window, a sure sign he was lost in thought. If anyone knew what Degurechaff's opinion was, it should be him. Better to ask her myself, Zettour decided. He wouldn't pass up the chance to pick the brain of the most extraordinary person he'd ever come across. She'd forewarned him of the world war, the evacuation at Brest, of difficulties large and small. At times, he'd ignored her advice, to his own chagrin. She could pull a win out of a losing hand better than a trained magician, so this time, he'd listen closely to whatever peculiar thoughts she had on the matter. "And your recommendation?" Romel asked, glancing up at Freinitzer after writing a few notes. "Assuming we'll be delayed in transporting our troops there, we have to expect we'll lose significant territory and have to dig the combatants out. Pulling in the men from Konigsberg, Steddin, and Dresdun should finish it in a few weeks." "That's half our official Army," Romel objected. "The Federation's going to wonder if that's just to put down a rebellion, or if we plan on going further. The second we threaten Polaska they might be at our border. You'll take the garrison from Steddin, and the same number from the Freikorps. I want a plan on my desk by the end of the week." "Yes, sir." "And someone tell Intelligence to get off their fucking asses and figure out how orbs got past our border. Even we haven't determined how it's possible to fool the detectors. Unless there's other comments, dismissed." Everyone glanced around, and then filed out a moment later. "I assume gathering the men is possible for you?" Romel asked, catching Zettour before he left. He nodded. "Very easy. It won't be difficult to arouse the nationalists with something like this, they'd likely all volunteer to go without pay. The bigger issue will be too many of them'll want to fight." "Better than the alternative," Romel smiled, pulling two cigars out of a drawer and handing one over. Zettour took it, and the light. "I'd best be going to get in touch with the right people. I'll let you know as soon as I've organized the men." "And I'll update you when I have marching orders to give," Romel sighed. "Should be Friday evening. Let's talk over a drink." Zettour nodded and left, shutting the door to the office behind him, walking a hallway he knew blind. He ran into Lehrgen near the end of the hall. "Where's Degurechaff sitting these days?" It was impossible to miss the look of annoyance that flashed across his face, but ever the obedient officer, the other man didn't hesitate in replying. "I'll show you. Stairs or elevator?" "Stairs," Zettour said firmly, ignoring the protest of muscles and bones aching from a long journey and little sleep. A man couldn't be expected to prevail on the battlefield if he couldn't be decisive about choosing his method of transport. They ascended a floor, making their way through the red-carpeted halls, past the bay windows that overlooked the park, past the painting that always made Zettour wonder if the painter wasn't a bit too fond of blood, the battle scene depicted with slightly more realism than artistically necessary. Lehrgen stopped and nodded at a half-open door. "I'm having a drink with Romel Friday evening," Zettour mentioned before he pushed the door the rest of the way open. "I'd be interested to hear how things are going if you have the time." Lehrgen nodded, began to salute, then must have remembered that it was no longer required, his hand hovering awkwardly in mid-air. Zettour left him like that, turning to knock at the door in front of him. "Degurechaff?" he queried, poking his head in. "Gen-ahh-sir," she greeted him, equally as unsure as her boss on how to address him. "I don't have long to catch up, but I could take a fifteen-minute coffee break tomorrow morning if you'd care to join." "Of course, sir." "If I recall, Café Zolka was your favorite?" "Your memory serves you well." "Ten o'clock?" "I'll see you then, sir."   
 
 October 1, 1931Café Zolka, Imperial Capital Berun
 
When Tanya’s former benefactor made his presence known to her, she was already enjoying her first cup of coffee at the café she’d discovered during War College. Much like the time Ugar had interrupted a restful moment years past, Tanya was a few articles deep into the day’s paper. And, much like that time, she wasn’t entirely sure what to expect when a throat cleared next to her table and she motioned for the other person to take a seat. It had been three years since she’d last seen the former General von Zettour. In the intervening time, he hadn’t changed much. The final three years of the war had taken a toll on him that his retirement hadn’t. For now, at least, he hadn’t aged much beyond that. It was clear from the still-trim figure and sharp eyes that his “retirement” was more active than most. While the rumors were largely kept well-contained, there was little doubt in her mind that Zettour could be called a “former” officer of the General Staff on nothing more than a technicality. In the aftermath of the war, they hadn’t said a proper goodbye. Hanging around the notorious child soldier apparently hadn’t been on the top of Zettour’s to-do list once he’d been tasked with reforming the Imperial Army away from its old vices. Although, Tanya supposed she could count the sound defense Zettour and Rudersdorf had done of her wartime record as something like a friendly farewell. It was possible Zettour was only there today to pick up the thread of camaraderie that had been abruptly cut off. Then again, world events being what they were and Zettour’s devotion to practicality being what it was, it was possible there was more to it. “It’s good to see you back here,” Zettour smiled as soon as he took his seat. “It’s a good opportunity to make a new name for yourself. You belong on the General Staff as much as I ever did.” And with that, a third option reared its head - Zettour had been pressed into service with the goal of a purportedly “neutral” party reminding her that it would be both her honor and duty to become a lifelong fixture at her current place of employment. Not only was Zettour well-connected, but, if the hints she occasionally got from Romel could be believed as to his hand in Imperial politics, the old director of the Service Department wasn’t above using extra-judicial means for putting unpatriotic whistleblowers permanently out of service. Tanya had no more reason to give him doubts about where her loyalties lay than she had back when she was reporting directly to him. “I’m not sure I’d go so far to say this is where I belong, sir. But I’m glad to hear my contributions are fully appreciated,” she replied, gracefully sidestepping the issue. Her years in the Japanese workforce had taught her how to avoid agreeing with someone without appearing offensive. Ironically, it might save her skin in this life, when all efforts at peacemaking had failed to keep her alive in the last one. “Truth be told I was surprised when I heard Lehrgen hired you,” Zettour said, rubbing at his chin and then squinting. “Not that you didn’t deserve it. I suppose his feelings about you must be changing by now.” “You’re right about that,” Tanya replied, confirming Zettour’s suspicion - now that she was no longer a child, the man in question was no longer dead set on shepherding her away from a life of violence. Regardless of his professional desire to keep her comfortably seated behind a desk, Tanya doubted Lehrgen would complain about having her active in the field. At this point, she’d done more to prove her capability operating in that arena than she had to prove the same in her current role. While she might have made the cut for a General Staff officer, she hadn’t yet made herself irreplaceable in that capacity. Before Zettour could dream up a new argument for why she should prematurely limit her career options, the waiter interrupted with a cup of coffee for him, so hot steam rose from the top even in the early autumn air. "Would I be correct in assuming you’re here because of what’s going on in Oberschlesia?” Tanya asked, rerouting the conversation. “I was curious as to your personal opinion,” Zettour replied, nodding in response to her question. “Times like this in the past, it seems to me you saw things differently than the rest of us more often than not.” Theoretically, her personal opinion was somewhat split on matters of national sovereignty. There was no freedom more vital than an individual's right to self-determination. In its most basic form, a country was nothing but a group of individuals willing to render their allegiance to a common entity in return for citizenship benefits. Therefore, they should retain the option to withdraw from the contract if a preferable mode of citizenship came along. Of course, the world she was living in was one where colonialism was very much alive and well. Outside of academic circles, the idea that forcefully deposing a foreign ruler might not convey with it the moral authority to rule in their place was one that people were still getting used to. That aside, there were practicalities to consider beyond an idealistic view of personal and national autonomy. To begin with, if the nation you were separating from had paid for your infrastructure out of a joint bank account, it was obvious they weren’t going to want to let the investment returns flow to a newcomer. And in this case specifically, Tanya was biased to think that keeping resources - financial, manpower, or otherwise - away from Stalyn trumped all other concerns. Unfortunately, she was all too aware of the perils of doing the right thing and dealing harshly with Oberschlesia’s communist ringleaders. Their narrative was to cast the Imperial state as the bad guys, an occupier and not a lawful governor. Marching into the province with an army wasn’t exactly going to do anything to disprove that notion. More likely than not, it would galvanize support for the Polaskan cause and set the stage for a wider revolt next time. Modern history books were full of cautionary tales like Algeria or Iraq. First and foremost, Tanya wanted to ensure her country didn’t commit itself to the fool’s errand of militarily subduing a restive border territory. And then, for her own good, she’d need to come up with a plausible excuse for that position that didn’t include displaying abject cowardice to someone who had little pity for cowards. “Traditional use-of-force hasn’t been successful so far in the region,” Tanya set forth “This is the third outbreak of violence in two years. It’s only gotten more organized in response to our efforts to put it down. At this point, we’re best off considering alternatives to a military intervention.” Zettour raised an eyebrow in surprise and put down his cup of coffee. “An alternative to a military intervention?” he asked, focusing his attention on her unpatriotic statement. “Am I hearing that correctly?” As she’d expected, he was wary of a solution that didn’t favor intimidating people into compliance with the business end of a weapon. It was the typical failing of any military man, and exactly what had landed them in a losing world war. The objection was one Tanya was prepared for. She’d served under Zettour for four years. Practical he might be, but practical about advancing the interests of the Imperial state. She was offering a solution that on the surface did precisely the opposite. “We’re looking at putting down the rebellion as an end in itself,” she explained. She took a sip of her own coffee to hide her sigh. Tunnel vision about how their actions played out on the world stage was the main culprit behind the country’s woes, and that didn’t seem to have changed. “Truthfully, it’s a means to an end. That end being international clout. When you look at it that way, it’s clear there are more available responses than brute force for putting us into an advantageous position.” Zettour took out a cigar and leaned into the back of his booth. “Go on.” “Offering a more conciliatory approach to our enemies-of-the-moment will make our story that we’ve learned from our mistakes more convincing,” Tanya explained, touching on a central theme of their new government as she waved smoke away from her face. “It will rewrite the story by casting us as the victims of communist destabilization schemes instead of letting the Polaskans claim victimhood at our hands.” “What sort of conciliatory approach are we talking? And how would we use it to our advantage?” Tanya eyed the clock along the side wall. Not enough time had passed yet to excuse herself to get back to her actual job, and, as usual, Zettour was asking her questions well above her pay grade. The question of what a realistic “conciliatory approach” might look like was best left to people with more diplomatic experience and better information than she had. All she’d intended was to stick the idea in someone’s head. Perhaps there were people out there capable of coming up with a novel and entirely workable government policy over a coffee break. She wasn’t one of them. Nonetheless, Zettour was looking at her expectantly. She supposed writing college-level analyses at age eleven had something to do with that. With no real avenue of escape, Tanya’s next-best bet was to give him an idea that wouldn’t work. The less feasible the implementation, the better. No amount of telling Zettour that she was unqualified for answering his question was going to get the point across like showing it to him directly. Once he heard her bad idea, it would leave him little choice but to leave her alone and consult more appropriate parties to get a real answer to the question of what their country could do to take the fire out of rebellious hearts that didn’t didn’t include putting bullets into them. “Letting the rebels think they have a chance could inspire their cousins across the border,” Tanya said, projecting a false confidence by putting her cup to her lips once more, like she was nonchalantly optimistic about such a far-fetched possibility. In fact, she was doing her best to hide her laughter at the thought of the Imperial Army playing the part of an inept, beleaguered force that could be defeated so easily. If there was one thing she was sure of on their current subject matter, it was that they’d never agree to such a thing. “Then, once the rest of the world realizes it’s a matter of continental stability, we’d have the support we need to march in at full might and eliminate the actors behind the rebellion root and stem.” Zettour raised an eyebrow, clearly skeptical of her so-called plan, and for good reason. In the end, if they were going to use military might as a tool of suppression, it was hard to argue that they should do it later and not now, thereby letting a dangerous movement simmer within their borders until other countries got around to telling them to get rid of it. They were already in a position to take the initiative unilaterally and plausibly explain the necessity of the resulting violence. “Obviously, once we’ve regained control within our own borders, the rest would depend on other powers understanding that under the present circumstances, a fully independent Polaska can’t exist,” she followed up, giving a final defense of her idiotic thesis. Realistically, Tanya wasn’t going to rely on the hope that the Commonwealth or the States would declare themselves the champion and protector of a neutral Polaskan state like they had in her last life, which might induce them to put their foot down and “encourage” the Federation to allow the potential counterrevolution she’d invented in the Polaskan People’s Republic to play out naturally - that was, in favor of western capitalism. She didn’t mind leaving Zettour with the impression she wasn’t all so realistic on that count. She was eighteen. A bit of political idealism could be excused. And all in all, her proposal wasn’t terrible, per se, only terrible from the perspective of a country caught up in the fray. If she lived sufficiently far away, she’d be happily cheering on said fray in Imperial Polaska if it had the remotest chance of spreading into a wider movement of Polaskan independence from the tyranny of their neighbors, including their communist ones. “A...novel idea,” Zettour finally said, stroking his chin as he tried to come up with a nice way of mentioning she’d put forward something that had no basis in reality. “Certainly, from a territorial perspective, it would be advantageous. But politically, I’m not sure it’s possible.” Tanya lifted her drink a third time, in this instance intending to hide a smile. Her idle theorizing had gone as planned. Zettour had recognized that her expertise was limited to generalizing about the situation, while at the same time being left with the impression that she was earnestly trying to strengthen the Imperial position by giving them a neutral buffer zone with the Federation. The success didn’t mean she could let the subject drop entirely. She didn’t want it to result in him completely abandoning the idea of taking a new approach altogether. Tanya could hardly afford to let intra-Imperial tensions keep her from achieving the peaceful life she wanted for herself when she had the opportunity to stave them off. “I understand,” she said, miming a sigh as though she was giving up on the prospect of the future she’d just outlined. “Still, limiting our focus down to solving the problem in front of us is going to end in us losing a second world war.” Tanya hesitated a moment, unsure of whether she should gamble away the goodwill she’d built up with Zettour. Ultimately, she decided in favor of taking a calculated risk. It was why she’d gone to the trouble of establishing her stalwart reputation in the first place. Now it was time to finally receive some dividends for her hard work. “That’s not a war I’m hoping to fight in,” she emphasized, getting across to Zettour that even such a reliable patriot as she’d painted herself as being wasn’t going to stand for defending a country that couldn’t learn from a lesson. Zettour waved a waiter over to order her another drink on his tab, only addressing her assertion once that was done with. “Degurechaff,” he smiled, peering across the table with a look of disbelief mixed with admiration, “never change.” Tanya smiled warmly in response. Unorthodox as a soldier as she might be, there were people out there who appreciated that she could occasionally put logic about blind obedience. It gave her hope that there really was a chance history wouldn’t repeat itself.   
 xXx 
It was three blocks from Café Zolka back to the General Staff Office, one north and two west. Hans von Zettour usually walked with a brisk pace and sense of purpose, but today, he meandered slowly back, considering the best piece of advice he'd heard out of anyone's mouth in regards to their current dilemma: there are more available responses than brute force for putting us into an advantageous position. Feeling generous, he sprinkled the loose change in his pocket into the hand of a beggar, then opened his wallet to draw out a note upon realizing it was an Army veteran. They were my responsibility, and still are, he reminded himself. And for his country, the most important objective was to fight their way out of international isolation, even if there had to be a temporary sacrifice of some territory. If the rest of the world perceived the Empire as too weak to deal with its own internal threats, they could use that to win one or two key treaty concessions. The Republic and the Commonwealth had no way of knowing that the rebellion wasn't fomented by the Federation. The Federation would have every reason not to desire a successful Polaskan independence movement. In that case, all parties could be goaded into giving the Empire a few more tools in its arsenal. Always, always there would be dissenters to deal with, unless the Empire took the inadvisable option of letting everyone see its cards while it played its hand. A too-canny politician here, a mole in the office there, he hadn’t intended to make it his job to guarantee their silence, but somewhere along the line, he’d found himself in too deep. The victors had stripped the Empire of its power; too much power, and if others were too blind to see that, Hans wasn’t. His country would be punished one way or another, abiding by the treaty or not, and better they go down fighting. That way, he had some chance of heading off to the grave as a citizen of the same country he’d been born into. Making sure of it mostly involved the right promises to the right people, the right money to the right hands, the right threat whispered into the right ears. Once in a blue moon, it required the stones to separate the right head from the right shoulders. It was theirs or his, and he liked his life, plagued by aching muscles and arthritic bones it might be. The one - and only - thing the would-be tattletales shared with Degurechaff was that they were assured the Imperial Army was preparing itself for a second world war. When it got right down to it, they weren’t wrong. They were preparing not to be caught helplessly in the middle when the countries west of them faced down the country east of them, if and when it came to it, as any sane army would do. And so, a well-meaning citizen such as himself had to order the elimination of the occasional well-meaning citizen who believed a touch too strongly in honesty, who saw Imperial re-armament as the sole obstacle to world peace and compelled them to try to report it. Now that he was used to pulling the levers that controlled the more violent tendencies of the shadow army he kept in his pocket, that would be the easy part. The hard part would be convincing men of action to sit back and do nothing. Well, I've faced worse, he thought, recalling that day he'd spent being shouted at by every industrialist, politician, or aristocrat whose name carried weight while he waited to hear whether they'd been successful in encircling the Republican Army. If that operation had failed, the likelihood of him leaving the room alive would have been far worse than the Empire's chances of winning the war ever had been. I was right that talking to Degurechaff would be useful, he congratulated himself, turning a corner and pulling his coat tighter as a cold gust of wind barreled down the street. Even if she still has a worrying tolerance for an immediate rematch with our opponents. She'd changed some in the years since he'd last seen her. She sat taller in her seat than she used to, her hair was shorter, her face less round, but the rigidly correct posture and crisp white shirt tucked into black slacks had given her away instantly. Though her back had been turned to him, he'd been able to identify her before he'd hung up his coat. He'd nearly had a heart attack when it had sounded like she was advocating tolerance towards the rebels. Not that he would have been unwilling to consider it, but coming from such a staunch Imperialist and anti-communist, it had been so unexpected that he'd briefly wondered if something was addling her mind. People changed with the years, but not that much. Not in a mere three, not unless they had a good reason. It had been a shame she still saw office work as so undesirable that she didn't think she belonged. From the reports he'd heard on her time working for the General Staff, she'd be a great asset to it. He'd perhaps missed the long-gone opportunity to recall her from the front and assign her to solving more far-reaching problems than individual battles. But, as ever, she was still a predator at heart. Only someone like Degurechaff could turn political unrest in the Empire into a plan for renewed Imperial control of Polaska. Under the guise of putting down the rebellion, it was true that the Commonwealth might be willing to overlook Imperial troops marching into Polaska itself and agree not to interfere, or perhaps even to support them, but that wasn't a risk he was prepared to take. As always, Degurechaff was an optimist on the prospect of what it was possible for the Empire to achieve. In reality, it could just as easily go the other direction, and would only solidify the currently shaky relationship between the Federation and the Commonwealth. It had been good to see she hadn't lost her spirit, though. Suffering a loss was dangerous for soldiers convinced of their own invincibility, but all signs pointed to her attitude being nearly unaffected. He reached the headquarters building and stopped, waiting as a guard pulled open one of the grand doors at the entrance. Time to see if they'll all still listen to me the way they used to, Zettour sighed to himself, firming up his resolve to push for an insipid response to the latest crisis, swapping a temporary military loss for a political win. Their country could use a few.   
 
 October 2, 1931Bar Schinkel, Imperial Capital Berun
 
The sight of a small menu posted outside the bar, white shining in the darkness, stopped Erich von Lehrgen. Leaning in close and squinting, he could just make out the words in the light cast off by the marquee sign above the door, the bar’s name illuminated in neon tubing and bathing the area the streetlamps didn’t reach in pale yellows and greens. Not for the first time, Erich shook his head at the numbers. The sign was new; the prices weren’t. It was silence he’d be paying for inside, silence on a Friday night in a city fast gaining worldwide notoriety for its nightlife. Relative silence; a safe refuge from excess revelry; freedom from needing to dress fashionably or order complicated cocktails. Before he was too old - forty, maybe - he’d have to get himself over to one of the famous nightclubs. With someone else, it would have to be, otherwise, he’d sit down, have one drink at the bar, and leave, he knew himself well enough to know that. With someone who wasn’t Elise, as she’d betrayed no interest any time he’d asked if they shouldn’t spend one of their long summer nights sleepless. He’d pay for the dress she claimed she’d never wear again. But there was always something - her scheduling at work gave her too many sleepless nights anyway, she’d decided to go to temple in the morning, or actually, she had an appointment she’d forgotten about - and he’d known enough women to know the constant excuses were nothing more than a polite way of saying no, so he’d stopped asking. One time Elya was in town, he could ask her. He doubted she’d seen the inside of a temple in her adult life, and were the urge to strike she’d go sleepless and wearing her dress from the club, he was quite sure. Or else, he’d have to ask Marian - she was fashionable, with fashionable friends, and she could recommend one who would understand the companionship he was looking for was friendly, only friendly, because he already had Elise, and though they’d yet to formally discuss that there was no one else, he knew he had her as surely as she had him. Neither was the type to want to juggle multiple dating prospects, and were they, they were too old now, with too much else to do. Sometimes, against all logic, he wished he were less sure they each had the other in their pocket, because then, for once, he’d be sure he had to choose: make things more official or end them entirely. It was what he liked best about his job, stressful as it might be: the worst choice he could make was none, this way or that way, it didn’t matter half as much as being decisive did, it didn’t let him give in to the part that wanted to second guess and wonder. It was Marian who’d told him not to buy jewelry for Elise, not unless he was sure, which he wasn’t, because he didn’t have to be. He’d given Marian some excuse or other - it was something to do with work, which wasn’t a lie. Only it wasn’t work’s fault, not this time, only their decision for their relationship to be their escape from work. It went well enough when they saw each other a few times a month; it wasn’t sustainable with a woman he shared a home with, and God willing a family, and he didn’t know what their relationship would be once life got mixed into it, it could be better, it could be worse, all he knew was he liked what it was now. He gave a final sigh and another shake of his head under the lamplight, then his hands found the knob for the door and pushed it open. For tonight, he was spending his time with people who you couldn’t pay to walk through the doors of a popular nightclub. Romel was already there when Lehrgen surveyed the room, sitting at the bar, cigar and drink in hand. Lehrgen handed off his coat to an attendant and crossed the empty space in between, giving a “sir” of acknowledgement before taking his own seat and ordering a glass of whiskey. He left a stool open in between for their third guest, once he arrived. When the bartender passed a glass quarter-full of dark amber across, Romel gave a sniff of laughter and looked the other way. It earned another utterance of “sir” out of Lehrgen, this time with a question in his tone. "Nothing," Romel said, shaking his head again. "You know you used to not be able to drink one of those without a half glass of ice, and even then you couldn't keep a straight face." Lehrgen humored him with a laugh at bringing up the old memory. Romel, then a Brigadier General himself, had been regularly called in as a guest lecturer when he was in War College. The older man always took an interest in the new crop of the Empire's most talented officers, offering them bits of personal wisdom along with a drink or three. Younger than most of the others in his class, Lehrgen had still been in the process of acquiring a taste for liquor when the two had met. "I wonder what stories your old instructors have about you, sir." "Worse ones," Romel replied with a shrug, pulling an unapologetic face. "But lucky for me, the ones who are still alive are all too old to remember that far back." "General and General," Lehrgen heard from behind him a few seconds later. He and Romel both turned at the interruption. "Hans," they greeted, getting up to shake hands, Lehrgen a step behind Romel. For good reason, Zettour had looked sleep-deprived the day of his arrival into Berun, but now that he'd had two nights to recover, in Lehrgen's estimation he looked well. Definitely better rested than he used to, but he supposed that's what retirement did to you. Although, whether Zettour had truly retired or not was a matter up for debate. He could have, if he'd wanted to, but the older man hadn't tired of plotting just yet. In any case, he kept what hours suited him instead of being holed up in the Staff Office all day. "How's the family?" Romel asked, as soon as Zettour settled into his own barstool and ordered a drink. Between the three of them, there was no chance the conversation wouldn't turn to work at one point, but they had to at least feign an interest in other subjects. "Well, Grete's still on me about how I leave my books lying about instead of putting them away properly, so about the same, only a few hundred kilometers west," Zettour laughed, "but you know how that is." Romel laughed heartily. Lehrgen doubted that books left around the house were what Romel's wife complained about. If he had to hazard a guess, he'd say it was either gun cleaning supplies or bottles of beer instead. He'd rather not think about what that said about their leader's state of mind. "Both the children are doing fine, although from what my daughter tells me, my oldest grandson, Fritz, is dating about seven girls at once," Zettour continued. "Would that I could be that age again. Especially in these times." Erich’s eyes found his drink, hoping not to be called on. He didn’t mind mentioning he was seeing someone; he didn’t mind admitting that if dating were a contest, Fritz would be beating him by a landslide. What he was in no mood to explain to Zettour’s generational jealousy was why the youngest person in the group by nearly three decades didn’t care that Fritz was beating him by a landslide and then get treated to a sermon by the older men of the ways he’d regret wasting his relative youth. "Well now, how about you?" Zettour asked, turning the question to Romel and allowing Erich to breathe a sigh of relief. "Trying to decide between my wife and I which of us hates you more for sticking me with this job," Romel replied, waving at the bartender to pour him another glass. "I wasn't put on this Earth to push papers around, you know.” "You were the best tactician in the field," Zettour replied. "Yes. In the field. I wasn't made for all the politics. If there's a single member of the Reichstag whose New Year's resolution doesn't include trying to boot me out of office, I'll count it as a success.” He paused for a moment. “Or maybe a failure.” "They all love to complain, but most of them approve of the job you're doing." "Doesn't seem that way," he muttered. "Now, speaking of things people don't approve of, my wife and phone calls at 2:30 in the morning." "Did she try to beat you with her slipper?" "Did yours?" "I expect that's what I get for marrying someone half-Ildoan," Romel grumbled. "No matter how many times I explain to her that it's part of my job, she somehow thinks it's my fault." Lehrgen held in his laugh at the image of their dauntless commander trying to escape the wrath of the spirited yet stern woman he'd married. He'd met Romel's wife a number of times, and the rest of his family, including the illegitimate daughter everyone pretended was his niece, a handful. Lucia von Romel had always come across as rather staid, but apparently she was just as rambunctious as her husband when she wasn't trying to maintain appearances. "And you?" Zettour asked, turning to Lehrgen. "Any closer to joining us in commiserating on the state of our marital relations?" “Ahh…” he hesitated. “Not really. Maybe. No.” Two faces turned towards him, two eyebrows raised in response. “I mean, there is someone, I just - I’m not sure where it’s going, so I don’t want to get ahead of myself. With both of us working we have other things to think about.” “Better off that way,” Romel muttered gruffly into his drink. “What’s she like?” He understood what Romel meant to ask. He pretended he didn’t. “Smart. Self-assured. Serious. Similar enough to me I think it could work if I get over myself about the differences.” “Humor an old man,” Romel complained. “What’s she like?” Some men liked to talk about what went on behind closed doors, he knew. Brag about it, bullshit about it, in the Army, he’d heard everything and more. He didn’t want to, never had, it was a blessing that Ernst didn’t tell stories either, when out of all of them he was the one with stories to tell. “Your imagination still works,” he shot across. He turned to the side to light a cigarette, then back. “Even if other things don’t.” “Careful,” Zettour coughed out, barely intelligible through laughter that had him nearly collapsed into his arms. He held one up to motion the bartender for another round. “Careful. You’ll get in trouble for that.” “Lucy would be happy to tell you she wished it worked less,” Romel said. “We can call her right now.” “It’s dangerous being in your job and getting into a habit of lying to yourself,” Zettour replied, clapping his successor on the shoulder. He spared a wink to his right for Erich. “I can say it. He’s not my boss.” “I’m younger than you,” Romel cut in, shoving Zettour’s hand away. “You tell yourself that,” Zettour laughed. His head turned towards Erich once again. “Anyway, on the subject of work, from what I hear, Chief of Operations is suiting you almost as well as it did Rudersdorf." Lehrgen smiled at the compliment. "I'd like that to be true, but I get the feeling the job's easier now than it was during the war," he deflected. "And I'm sure it's that much easier with Degurechaff on your side. Singing a different tune about her now?" Zettour had said he’d ask about her the next time, and he had. Lehrgen couldn’t hold it against him. There was no argument that he’d been wrong about her. None. The only argument was that his perspective had initially been incomplete; he’d seen one side of her, not the whole. He’d yet to see a reason he should disregard the ample evidence they had that Tanya’s bad side was several orders of magnitude worse than most people’s. "No, no," he contested. "It's not that. You were the one who just told me yesterday she wants to use the rebellion as a pretext to invade Polaska.” He'd known a meeting between her and Zettour would result in something like that, but if he'd refused to show the older man to her office, he would have simply asked someone else. Half the rationale behind hiring her was to control which of her eccentric ideas made it out of his office and to the ears of others, and yet Romel and Zettour were both set on giving her an audience. "If you still thought she was the Devil himself made flesh, you would have seen her promptly out the door instead of hiring her," Zettour pressed on. "She's just too damn useful for her own good," Lehrgen huffed indignantly. Zettour looked down at his drink contemplatively, and then drained it. "I told myself the same," he said, tone shifting into something like regret, "every time I had to justify throwing a girl too young to be finished with primary school into the worst parts of the front. I do wonder sometimes what sort of villains she imagined her superior officers to be. Although knowing her, she might not have seen anything wrong with it." Lehrgen looked down into the bottom of his drink. Out of the corners of his eyes, he could see the other two men doing the same, their previous humor evaporating instantaneously. The night dragged on slowly after that, one drink following another following another, an endless distraction from staring the obvious truth in the face he’d been avoiding for years, until Zettour had to go and say it out loud. Erich’s feet found their way to another bar when his time with Zettour and Romel drew to a close. He wasn’t to the point of being unable to recognize himself in the mirror when he got home, nor of falling into a dead sleep straight away, and he wanted both. A quick jaunt into cool night air and then he was back under dim yellow light, surrounded by more noise, more people, this time. The bar was full, men cheering as they clinked shot glasses together, women huddled in a circle whispering, a scattering of the former trying their luck with the latter, all standing. There was an empty barstool waiting for him as soon as he shouldered through. A fifth, sixth, maybe seventh - he’d lost track - drink made its way into his open hand a moment later. When he ordered again almost immediately, the bartender took notice, a half-smile on his lips while he finished drying a glass. “She did you that bad, huh?” “Mm?” “You look like a man drinking to forget a woman. Seen enough of it to know.” “You wouldn’t be entirely wrong,” Erich slurred, hearing the words crash into each other as they came out. Enough liquor to forget Tanya would kill him, he knew beyond a shadow of a doubt. Enough to forget the part he’d played in creating the monster he’d professed to hate, maybe not. Everyone makes mistakes, everyone has regrets, everyone chooses wrong sometimes, he told himself, the same line he’d been repeating for hours now. Instead of becoming more convincing with each drink, it had become less, the mental gymnastics needed to reassure himself this fell under the usual realm of excusable human error growing further out of reach until he could no longer put it in the same category as the minor transgressions he wanted to - words said in anger he wished he could take back, blaming the family dog for breaking a lamp, the time his brother had switched the salt with sugar and embarrassed the poor cook because he was fourteen and thought it was funny. The plain fact of it was that for the sake of expediency, they'd all sat back and watched as children of thirteen and fourteen, or in one memorable case, eight, had their pencils and papers swapped for rifles and orbs, their math lessons turned into learning how to calculate a spell's trajectory, their play time substituted for target practice. They'd told themselves there was no choice, that it was the only way to gain the advantage in numbers they needed. Erich had spent the better part of the last decade criticizing Tanya to anyone who'd listen for her fundamental failing to take any human factor into account when she made her decisions. But if you took a child, an overly bright and overly mature one, and the first thing she ever understood about the Army was that eking out an advantage was more important than anything else, that her life mattered less than her mana reading, was it any wonder she'd turned out that way? Add to that a fact that everyone had simply failed to consider in her case, that the usual underage recruits of thirteen and older were past the age where they played pretend, but that Tanya, at eight or nine, would have still had a child's imaginative mind. A child at that age, possessed of a brilliance far surpassing the average adult, then told that her job was to come up with ways, to the best of her ability, to kill and maim and disable enemy soldiers, armies, or even entire states? Who could blame her for finding possibilities that were each more appalling than the last? The world unfocused for a second when he lifted his head to catch the bartender’s attention again, the light, the noise, the smell of too many people, too many types of drinks, the syrupy, sticky sweet of liquor spilled on the floor and dried threatening to turn his stomach now that they’d registered. The drink he received back was over ice, the cold glass just refreshing enough to stave off the pang of nausea. When he took a sip, he could taste it had been watered down on top of it. He held it up to the light, tried to inspect the color to judge how much for reasons he couldn’t say - he’d pay the same price regardless - then gave up trying to make calculations almost as soon as he’d begun, settling for watching the ice swirling in the glass as he moved it, listening to it chink along the edges. He'd thought he'd been doing a good thing. That if Tanya hadn’t been allowed to aim her rifle at enemy soldiers, she wouldn't have put the weapon down, but instead she'd have turned right around and trained it on the country he loved. Over and over, until there was no room left in his mind for other thoughts, he’d told himself that she couldn’t be stopped, only redirected. That had rung true enough, during the war. Once she’d made that decision to enroll herself, stopping her from becoming a frontline soldier had been bigger than him, bigger than her, bigger than any one person’s power to prevent. It had been easier to blame her, though, for turning out the way she did, like it had been inevitable, not the product of too many people refusing to do the right thing. Tanya, needless to say, included. He doubted she'd have grown up entirely normally, regardless, had she not already had a tendency towards callous indifference, cruelty and brutality wouldn't have taken root so easily to turn her into the corrupted parody of an officer candidate he'd seen that day at OCS. And still, the girl who he knew could have turned out better because he’d seen the proof these last two years was now a product of that miseducation, had been irreparably altered by it, twisted past the point she might have twisted herself left alone. It was foolishly optimistic to think that the violence and malice could ever be erased in their entirety. They'd probably been there to begin with, and then they’d taught her how to play to her strengths, and she was nothing if not a good student. There were some sins you could spend the rest of your life performing penitence for without ever making up for them, and there was no doubt this was one. Gingerly, he slid a foot down to touch the ground, making sure it was planted solidly before the rest of him followed, with a hand on the bar counter to keep his balance while he adjusted to standing up. With the change from paying his bill jangling in his pocket, he tracked down the nearest phone booth, grasped for the receiver, told the operator to dial the hospital for him. He lit another cigarette waiting for Elise to come to the phone. “Can’t-,” he cleared his throat. “I can’t make it tomorrow night. Sorry.” “Are you drunk?” she asked, exasperation evident in her tone. “Where are you?” “I’m out. With work people. It’s just work is all.” “Do you want to talk about it?” “No,” he said, shaking his head to himself, needing to put a hand to the glass of the box around him when it made him dizzy. Explaining it out loud would make it worse than it really was. He’d done the right things, mostly, at least for the last two years, working on untwisting Tanya. For the wrong reasons, maybe, for his own sake and not for hers, but the right things, nonetheless. “No, I just need the night to myself.” “Alright,” she said. “I’ll see you next weekend, then.” He mumbled out an agreement and hung up, not sure what it was he planned on doing in his free time. He was already trying to bury Tanya’s memories of her former life deep enough to never see the light of day again, and she’d shown herself capable of responding positively to repeated strong pushes in the right direction. There was nothing that he needed to do differently, no plans to change. All that really needed to change was him, ironically enough, into the person Tanya had always thought he was. 




 

 I forget myself; I want you to remind me






 
 "I have nothing to declare except my genius."
 
 
 
 
 October 16, 1931General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 
The cool crunch of the fall’s crop of crisp lettuce between her teeth was a pleasant enough distraction from Tanya’s thoughts to turn her lunch break into just that - a break. A seasonal, healthy salad was a rarity during her workday owing to the lack of accessible refrigeration in the office. As they similarly lacked an easily accessible stove and microwaves were a figment of no one’s imagination besides her own, Tanya’s typical afternoon meal usually consisted of heartier fare that wasn’t sensitive to temperature, or was purchased fresh from a restaurant nearby. Last Friday, she’d discovered a secret for improving both her physical and financial health. As promised by Erna, her now almost-monthly periods came with both more regularity and more discomfort than they started off with. Unfortunately, they were as of yet not so predictable that she couldn’t be caught unawares. Ever since she’d had to run home in the middle of the day to change she’d taken to carrying a small personal satchel containing emergency goods, so luckily, her unexpected visitor hadn't been able to do too much harm when it had arrived off-schedule a week ago. The one thing she’d declined to include within her stash was a bottle of aspirin, mostly on account of the fact that it rattled around and announced its presence to everyone with each step she took. In spite of having the capability of eliminating physical pain without resorting to pharmacological intervention, sans orb, the ongoing calculation required virtually all of her concentration, making it incompatible with performing her job. As well as life generally, assuming she required sleep or wanted to do something besides lying in bed fixing a mathematical equation in her head during her free time. For that reason, Tanya had taken a trip down to the typist pool when the need struck. There was no guarantee that asking an individual member of the female clerical staff closer to her personal office would yield results. She had no desire to ask around with her male colleagues and chance that they’d divine the reason. If word got around, she could be sure a number of them would relish the opportunity to blow off anything she said that they didn’t agree with for the next few days as a product of her supposed irrational state. This was, after all, 1931. She’d felt somewhat awkward going to ask a favor from the women on the first floor. Not over what she was asking for, but because in a certain sense, she was one of their group - a woman employed by the Imperial Army without being part of it - and she hadn’t yet paid her dues as a member. On rare occasions, usually as an afterthought to a visit up Lieutenant Sauer’s way, one of them would mention the group of ladies was going for drinks after work. So far, Tanya had declined all such invitations. She wasn’t sure she had enough in common with them to talk about, and nothing would be more uncomfortable than agreeing to go and then spending the night self-consciously hanging off the margins of other people’s conversations. To avoid being pressured while she was down visiting, Tanya surreptitiously clued the girl she knew the best into her delicate disposition for the moment. In response, Alma had offered her dessert along with her aspirin. Alma’s chocolate pudding, in the third-floor icebox. The icebox which she was positive nobody on her floor, the second, knew existed. After making a few inquiries with Alma about why there was an icebox outside the kitchens, Tanya had learned that her previous high command, during their stint ordering around millions of men making do with whatever food or drink they were lucky enough to get, had been offended by the temperature at which water came out of the cold tap. There was a receipt lying around somewhere in purchasing for an oversized water pitcher-cooler coded as war materiel, for anyone that cared enough to look. Nowadays, the icebox fell under the jurisdiction of Romel’s personal assistants, or those friendly with them. With a vague promise to make it up to Alma some other time, Tanya had gotten her name down on the restricted access list. And thus, she’d managed to come by a bit of a silver lining out of her misery, and could sit there enjoying a cheap and healthy homemade meal. Tanya glanced at the clock while she stabbed her next forkful of vegetables. Excusing a few more minutes towards the further contemplation of her pain and suffering would be permissible. While she didn’t take any personal offense to some of their Polaskan citizens wanting their own country, the ongoing failure of the Intelligence department to track down where and when orbs had crossed the border was beginning to make her nervous. The contemporary understanding of mana was sorely lacking answers to the questions of what it was or where it came from. In all likelihood, that was something of a fool’s errand if Being X had anything to do with it. What wasn’t a mystery to any of them that studied or used it was the practical side of how mana functioned. Academic knowledge on the history of magical technology hadn’t been part of the standard Army mage curriculum, and even so Tanya had picked up that once orbs had shrunk down small enough to fit in a pocket, the standard method of manufacture required already-existing orbs, and mages to operate them. Without computers, the precision necessary to make orbs was only achievable using other orbs. Like most things, mana left a trace. An orb at rest might not broadcast its presence the way a mage flying through the air did, but with the right spell at a close enough range, it was possible to detect the latent presence of magic that had been used to make the orb. Every modern country had detection systems at its customs checkpoints designed to prevent exactly what had happened - orbs coming in or going out of the country unauthorized, especially military-grade ones. The technology had been a necessary outgrowth of producing what amounted to pre-nuclear-age superweapons. Without it, sending a couple mages on an international vacation and then shipping their forgotten personal effects across the border would be enough to shut down an unfriendly country’s capital city. Airdropping heavy artillery directly into a central location would be less damaging. In that case, the police would know friend from foe. Mages were harder to distinguish from bystanders. Tanya’s plan for after the war had always been first to stay out of trouble and second to secure a solid career track to guarantee a hassle-free existence. Ideally including an intellectually challenging role, a steadily-increasing salary, high risk of papercuts and overtime. The usual dreams of a salaryman. Things hadn't gone exactly as desired. Losing the war had meant lowering some expectations. Her sacrifices so far had been few - her job was interesting, it paid decently, and it only involved discussing theoretical harm to other people. It wasn't her optimal career path, but on the most important point - the not constantly struggling against death part - she'd held her ground. That was, until now. She'd built a peaceful, normal life with her own two hands, and rogue operators were threatening to tear it down. Armed with orbs and explosives, there would be few better targets than Berun generally, and government buildings specifically, one of which she happened to work in. Even if her office was safe, she sat a stone's throw away from the Reichstag, which put her life under an unacceptable level of threat. Of course, on a theoretical level, she was mildly academically curious as to how an orb could be made untraceable. She wasn’t quite so curious she cared to track down the answer herself. She’d happily read the reports from experts paid to research the matter. To the uneducated, she might seem like she could talk the talk, but in reality, she was as good a replacement for an engineer as a racecar driver was for his mechanic. On principle, Tanya rejected the idea of performing free labor. That was, for anyone’s benefit other than herself. With her own wellbeing at stake, it behooved her to take some time away from her official duties to puzzle over the quandary stumping their national security measures. So far, her idle thoughts on the subject had come up with two plausible conjectures that neither relied on an absurd number of coincidences nor baseless theorizing about the exact nature of mana: supernatural intervention and human corruption. On the count of supernatural intervention, the sole point in favor was simply that Tanya knew Being X both had it out for her and hadn’t come up with anything new to show for it recently. Beyond that, it was a stretch of the imagination, even for her, the only person on the planet that had cause to suspect supernatural intervention was remotely likely. Planting orbs in a convenient location for a Polaskan separatist to find them was a touch too inconspicuous for an antagonist who got pleasure out of revealing his nefarious master plans to the besieged hero. Whatever he truly was, Being X was a creature that had all the subtlety of an advertisement for a massage parlor in a red light district. Indirect wasn’t his style. It might not have been in his vocabulary. She would like to think that the Empire’s investigative team had ruled out demonic intervention on the basis of logic. Unfortunately for them all, Schugel had been sent into early retirement, not an early grave. As the Empire’s resident expert on magical technology, his opinion here would be highly sought after. There was no telling what odd notions he was assaulting the intelligence of rational men and women with. Ignoring that left her with the most likely option: corruption. Bribing customs officials was a tried and true method of trafficking illegal goods, in the current case only slightly complicated by the international oversight in place. Few political loyalties could overcome personal greed. No inconsistencies had turned up in any records or testimony as of yet, but all that proved was that the person responsible knew how to cover their tracks. While new hires tended to be under the most suspicion in these circumstances, the truth was that a senior employee had a better chance of pulling it off. The good news was the separatist mages were either untrained or were using cast-off Federation technology. Based on the number of detonations the ballistics experts estimated took place, they weren't dealing with well-equipped professionals. Any standard military-grade orbs- Wait. Military-grade orbs. Military-grade orbs. Of course, Tanya muttered to herself. The answer was so obvious it had hidden in plain sight. It was a huge mistake to assume she could trust the reports saying the rebels were in possession of military models when she knew there was no way to trace exactly which orb was used. Mass-produced orbs were a relatively new technology, and most people, mages included, had trouble understanding how much their presence altered battle tactics. Up until the past decade, mages were seen as nothing but a supporting role for artillery. Optical decoys were used so inconsistently they might as well have not existed. Almost hilariously, had it not been so painful to undo the academy training, the original field manual had instructed aerial forces to disperse when facing an infantry formation, like they were helplessly floating sixty feet above instead of equipped with defensive barriers and flying beyond the limit of regular gunfire. The realization was worth abandoning her salad, and along with it the short break she’d approved for herself. On certain occasions, Tanya found she still had trouble reigning in the natural reactions caused by her youthfulness. She could only imagine what people would say were she caught skipping her way down the hall to Lehrgen’s office the way she wanted to. For the first time in memory, she caught her boss with his glasses off, looking down at his hands while he polished the lenses with a handkerchief. The sight of his bare face - a reminder that his glasses weren’t a natural feature like they seemed - sent her thoughts spiraling into an unpleasant tangent. Tanya sucked her bottom lip up under her teeth and bit it angrily, unable to prevent herself from a momentary temperamental display at the prospect of a potential joke played by Being X. In her past life, she’d needed glasses by the time she’d finished elementary school. In this life, she’d spent comparatively more time reading from an earlier age, in considerably worse lighting conditions, and at no point had her vision shown signs of faltering. One of the basic requirements for any combat position, up until an army got desperate, was decent eyesight. Doubly so for mages. Requiring corrective lenses was simply incompatible with the job description. Had her vision blurred on schedule this time around, she would have been carted off to a comfortable rear-line position like the lucky bastard in front of her. At the moment, she felt the keen lack of search engines in her life. The Internet being host to the full spectrum of humanity, including the weirdest elements, she couldn’t have been the first person to ask it how to force her eyesight to deteriorate safely. She couldn’t with any certainty blame Being X for keeping her in eligible-for-service condition. The mere shadow of a possibility that his hand had meddled with her body to inconvenience her further was enough to piss her off. "I guess you were only around other people with perfect sight," Lehrgen said, glancing at her out of the corner of his eye. "I didn't realize you'd find cleaning glasses so fascinating to watch." Tanya cleared her throat and snapped out of her current occupation of hurling mental curses in the general direction of evil mind-readers. "You could tell it was me without them on?" "It's not that bad. I just can't make out detail at a distance anymore. I could get away without them half the time, but it's a pain to keep taking them on and off." "When did you start wearing them?" Tanya asked curiously, wondering at what age she'd have to let go of any hope that it might serve as an excuse to avoid meaningful participation in a future conflict. "I started needing them twelve, maybe thirteen years ago, around the time I was in the Commonwealth. Must've spent too much time hunched over missives at night," he told her, finishing the thorough job he was doing and replacing the glasses on his face. "I was afraid if I said anything that my matriculation into War College would be canceled so they could give my place to someone else. After I got put in Personnel, I knew I was safe to mention it." Tanya nodded with approval at the smart piece of strategizing. Over the years, it was Lehrgen’s ability to navigate a course with two co-pilots fighting for the helm - one advocating self-serving rationality, the other his own brand of moral reasoning - that had left her the most impressed. Lacking confidence that she could do the same so successfully, she’d long ago chosen to stake her career on one over the other. The decision had been a good one on her part, as evidenced by her stellar promotion record in both this life and the last. Somewhat to her chagrin, Lehrgen appeared to be almost better at getting what she wanted without needing to take such a strict approach. There was no denying being born with money and title had something to do with that. Tanya hadn’t started with either, though certainly the situation had been more dire this time around. All in all, Lehrgen had been afforded the opportunity to flub his lines more than she had, without it ruining the whole play. There was similarly no denying that she couldn’t shrug off his opinion as less valid than hers in the cases they happened to differ. There was something to be said for an experiment where ideal results could be produced from an alternative method, regardless of the fact that it required a more hospitable environment to grow. It was gratifying to think the respect was returned. Lehrgen had seen how well she’d fared under her own tutelage, and doing so had inspired him to believe she had a future in his world with its different rules. It was what made her eager to prove her worth as a protégé to him beyond the basic and obvious reason that he was her boss. Though, she couldn’t by any means say that was a negligible factor in the equation. "I always tell myself that not being able to see the board properly is the reason I didn't graduate first in my class,” Lehrgen mused with a self-deprecating laugh, as Tanya waited for him to invite her in to take a seat, which he did a moment later after an apology for his oversight. "What place were you, if you don’t mind my asking?” "Third." “I have to imagine you’re ahead of both first and second by now when it comes to job title.” “August von Neisen graduated top of the class. Deserved it, probably. I’m good at this sort of thing.” Lehrgen waved a hand over his paperwork. “von Neisen had a better head for commanding in the field than I did, and you need more officers in the field than back here, at least when it matters. He got posted as a lieutenant colonel to the Rhine Front as soon as it opened up. He’s still there in body, if not in spirit.” “His sacrifice won’t be forgotten,” Tanya said, coming up with an appropriately meaningless response to the death of a man she’d never met. Lehrgen humored her with a tight smile, tired and joyless, recognizing her lie for what it was. The dead were a convenient group to advocate for as a politician. They were both extremely pitiable and extremely undemanding and uncritical of your policies. For practical-minded soldiers, the dead were utterly irrelevant. Cold bodies could start wars; warm ones were required to win them. Lehrgen’s job, and by extension hers, was to keep as many of the latter from becoming the former as they could. “Georg von Schreise got the second spot,” Lehrgen chuckled. “Another enemy in common between us.” Tanya laughed in return. The original faces in Northern Command had never gotten over the dressing-down she’d given them at Rudersdorf’s behest. Thankfully, their names had fallen out of favor not long afterwards. “It wasn’t that he wasn’t smart,” Lehrgen squinted as he drifted off into memory. “Just I have a feeling he edged me out because he had more of a knack for saying what people wanted to hear than I did. I mean, there’s caring enough what people think and there’s caring too much, you know?” Tanya squinted back, loathe to admit her failure. No matter how much she’d done to parrot the party line, all she’d been able to attain was second-from-last in the final cut. And that after she’d eliminated Ugar as competition. Lehrgen was lucky not to have needed such handicaps. “I can’t say his habit of doing so didn’t put us at odds,” she demurred with a half-truth. Her and Schreise’s respective attention to what their superiors had wanted was precisely what had pitted them against each other. “But you don’t entirely agree?” Lehrgen asked, raising an eyebrow. Tanya tilted her head to the side in mock confusion. “Well, I might, but then you might say I cared too much about what other people think, you know?” “Touché, Degurechaff,” Lehrgen said, with a bark of laughter at the joke she’d made of the compromising position he was trying to put her in. “Touché.” “I-,” Tanya said, intending to get to the point of why she was in his chair and catching herself in hesitation. Back in her own office, she’d been perfectly confident in the conclusion she’d drawn about the orbs. Now, face to face with someone capable of making an intellectual argument against her and riding her high of coming out on top of the last exchange, she was loath to potentially make a fool out of herself by sticking her neck out. “I was thinking about the orbs in Oberschlesia,” she finally admitted. “I had a theory. I hope it’s at least enough to merit interrupting your day for a few minutes.” “Look, Degurechaff, if I’ve made you feel like you’re a nuisance the times you’ve come to impose on me and not the other way around, I really am sorry,” Lehrgen said, scratching at the side of his nose. “I’ve been a bit ambivalent about having you around and I guess it’s come out ways I didn’t mean.” “No,” she shook her head, looking down at her nails as a distraction. Once again, she’d managed to give Lehrgen the wrong impression and had gotten him thinking he’d erred in showing too much intolerance for her status as what essentially amounted to a still-underage almost-officer. “That’s not it. I just - for all I know I’m going to prove why you ranked third and I only got eleventh in our respective classes.” "Eleventh at age eleven is ever so slightly more impressive." Tanya scoffed at the false faith in her abilities. Had she not had the benefit of having studied the two world wars, and their resulting power struggles, she would have been lucky to have made it into War College at all. “What was your thesis on?” she asked, curious what a military academic that didn’t have her knowledge had come up with to write about. Lehrgen rubbed at the back of his neck. “Honestly, it’s embarrassing to admit.” Tanya raised an eyebrow, more interested than before. Listening to that kind of confession would make it easier to chance being badly and irrevocably wrong herself. “I would say you have to understand the context, but I think that actually makes it worse,” Lehergen laughed, leaning back and crossing his arms. “Alright, so I told you how my first real command was in Alsatia, right?” “I wonder if you ever met my father,” Tanya mused. “I assume he participated in the conflict, since that’s where he died.” Lehrgen paused and frowned. “That’s very weird to imagine,” he mumbled. “I don’t think so, which was probably for the best. I doubt if he’d like me very much, now or then.” Tanya lifted her hand to her mouth to disguise her humored expression. “I’m sure he’d be even less likely to give his blessing to my own choices,” she shrugged. Enlisted men closing in on a decade of service, like my father would have had, exhibited notoriously little respect for superiors born into the pampered, pipelined-to-officerhood class. Especially so when the man - or, boy, as Lehrgen would have been at the time by his definition - was fresh out of high school and thinking his better education made him better equipped than veterans to make decisions. The people such veterans had still less respect for were the traitors to their own kind. In a nutshell, people like her, who courted the affections of the pompous know-it-alls instead of tolerating them until they were out of earshot. Lehrgen’s face made a startled expression, like he wasn’t sure what to make of her admission. “I don’t let it bother me,” she assured him. “Well,” he sighed, “speaking of disapproval, ironic as it is in retrospect, I ended up as an aide to the colonel in charge of operations around Colmer, and he liked having an assistant that could think for himself as much as he disliked that it meant I got ideas of my own every so often. He was a bit old-fashioned when it came to thinking more bodies afforded the advantage they used to. In reality we were in the beginnings of the era of attrition warfare, and he didn’t give much regard to how differences in amount or type of firepower changed things. Preaching to the choir, I know.” Lehrgen ducked his head briefly in deference to her expertise on the subject, then picked his story back up. “Anyway, Colonel von Ulenberg didn’t treat me unfairly in the aftermath, quite. The Londinium assignment I got was a good one, only it was about the opposite of what I’d said I wanted. I knew I was good for the office work; what I wanted was good experience I could lean on that proved it wasn’t all there was to me. If you want to make it up the ranks past a certain point, the worst thing is to get shoe-horned into a single corner.” In response to Lehrgen’s meaningful glance in her direction, Tanya let the dejected posture she took as she sank into her seat speak for itself. Despite her best efforts, between the interference of Being X with the Type 95 and the necessities of aerial superiority, she had ended up in that precise position when it came to the personal achievements she could list off. Thankfully, she’d found someone that could sympathize. “In a strange way, I suppose I have the war to thank for the fact I was deemed fit for general command,” Lehrgen shrugged. “It skewed the promotion circuit in my favor and there was no choice but to take a chance on me. Still, needless to say, I didn’t appreciate that von Ulenberg’s parting act before he retired had been an attempt to send me into obscurity. I knew he stayed close friends with a number of my instructors in War College, so…” “So?” Tanya followed up, after a few seconds of silence, leaning her elbows forward onto the desk in front of her to indicate she wasn’t going to be satisfied by hearing the whole story besides the most important part - the conclusion. “So, that’s how my thesis turned into a big mathematical modeling experiment instead of some more directly usable theory,” Lehrgen said, with a sheepish smile. “It wasn’t like I was the only one with the right gut instinct about separating the total number of men deployed from the total force deployed. I was just the only one invested enough in proving someone else wrong to get petty about going through the records and doing the calculations for no reason other than getting the last word in.” Tanya let out a small laugh at the secret power play lurking behind that piece of Lehrgen’s professional brilliance. As a subordinate, it wasn’t a fault she would readily admit to. As a superior, contrary to Lehrgen’s fears of reflecting badly on him, it fleshed out the narrative of what drove him and contributed to an image of there being a dynamic person occupying his seat. Frustratingly, this put her usual tactic of being the person her boss wanted her to be further out of reach. That answer varied based on factors she would have a hard time predicting without knowing him better than his own family probably did. Nevertheless, Tanya’s spirits perked up at the mention Lehrgen trusted in analytic research to be a useful pursuit. Quantitative assessments of the sort he described were what all armies of the era were soon going to realize were valuable. Thanks to herself and her boss, the Empire didn’t need to fall behind the times on that count. There wasn’t a single word in a single document forbidding them from making more effective use of what they had possession over. Convincing men standing on the precipice of a new age of automation to not only trust numbers over their “battle instincts” when the two conflicted, but to devote substantial time and money to discovering what those numbers had to say was a gargantuan task Tanya hadn’t yet gotten around to tackling. Lehrgen was shaping up to be a potentially receptive audience, so long as she treated the endeavor as an extension of his own work. In fairness, he had more of a right to take credit for it than she did for any of her so-called “original” ideas. “I think I - we,” she quickly corrected, clearing her throat, “we could take the idea further. A world war is a one-of-a-kind data trove. I’m sure there’s more lessons to be learned.” “I’m sure you’re right,” Lehrgen sighed. “And just as sure I don’t have the time to sift through it.” “You’re in a position to delegate,” Tanya pointed out. “Not that much work,” he shook his head. “Without a specific question we’re trying to answer in mind, there’s just so much to look at. Too much.” “Hasn’t Zettour been studying something similar?” Lehrgen tilted his head back and forth. “In a way. More along the lines of what we know in retrospect we got wrong so we don’t repeat the mistake.” “He should understand the gist of it, though,” Tanya concluded. “And he has people he could assign to combing through old documents without needing to justify why the Operations department is engaged in writing a joint book report.” “And you think men who got inspired at the thought of continuing on as part of a paramilitary want to write a joint book report with each other?” Lehrgen questioned, disbelieving laughter tingeing his voice. “Not everyone’s you, Degurechaff.” Tanya sat up straighter and feigned offense that her suggestion wasn’t considered perfectly palatable to citizens obsessed with wearing their nationalism on their sleeve. “It’s what will win the Fatherland the next war,” she said, with a sly wink at the line they’d use to hook people. “I’m sure none of them want to miss out on their chance to make a difference.” Apparently unable to keep his face straight in order to play his part in the joke, Lehrgen looked down at his papers. His gaze found her a second later, his mouth working to contain a smile, and then dropped again. “Alright,” he said, letting out a deep breath. Gray-blue eyes floated more slowly back to hers, this time seriously. “It’s a good idea, so I’m going to trust you on this one. I don’t want anyone coming away with the wrong idea. Don’t encourage any subversive notions. We’re doing this clean and for the right reasons. If you can work with it like that-,” “I can,” Tanya nodded eagerly. Lehrgen was right to be wary of putting grandiose ideas in certain heads, though she preferred to think their endeavor would do more to cool down some of the hot ones by ordering them off the streets and into the library stacks. She offered up a smile for her co-conspirator, then decided she’d be best off making sure they got all the ground rules out of the way. Annoying as it was to have additional parameters laid on her, she’d rather know them in advance. “It’s not really my place to give you work,” Tanya chuckled. “Any other conditions you’d like to name for what it will take to steal more of your time away for myself?” “Sort of,” he said, reaching for his planning book and flipping through. “I wish I had the time to spend with you on this, but I don’t. I’ll put you in touch with the right people. After that, it’s going to have to be up to you to get results, not us. And you can’t force-march them through the Alps under fire to get them to listen.” Tanya did her best to mask her excitement as something more akin to disappointment. This being established on top of Lehrgen’s hard work, she didn’t want to make him suspect she was going to steal all the credit for later discoveries. Of course, she was also sad to hear she was going to be laboring away without much assistance from a reliable coworker. That was eclipsed by the news she was getting put in charge of a project, and would at long last get proper, personal attribution for a landmark piece of officework. That wasn’t working under additional constraints. That was a bonus. “For now, how about…” Lehrgen began, scanning his schedule. “Fridays. Every other week. During lunch, since I guess we both have the time. Since this is less than perfectly official, I don’t want it overlapping with the meetings we normally have.” Tanya gave a slight wince of acknowledgement that on a whim, she’d taken up not only her own Friday lunchtime for the day, but Lehrgen’s as well. “And this will be about discussing what’s the most promising, not proving you’ve collated the data correctly,” he went on. “If I let you bring hundreds of pages of files I’m afraid you’ll let them do the talking in lieu of yourself. Adler’s?” “Adler’s?” Tanya interjected, not entirely successful at keeping the whine out of her voice. “I’m not trying to be cheap,” he objected. “But this is every other week we’re talking. Why, what did you want?” Her dispute with Berun’s chain of cost-conscious restaurants had little to do with the price. The truth was, she would rather pack a lunch than subject herself to budget-friendly Germanian food when she wasn’t required to get her calories from camp rations. “What about Krone?” The cafe she suggested was one she knew to serve a full lunch menu more suited to her tastes. Additionally, she wanted to reserve the right to ignore Lehrgen’s warning about excessive documentation if and when she deemed it necessary. Adler’s might be cheap, but it was a proper restaurant, white tablecloths and all. The relatively cozier atmosphere of Krone would make it easier to drop the formalities of dining etiquette so she could lay papers out on the table. “Alright,” Lehrgen nodded, marking it on his calendar. “Krone, starting two weeks from today. Now, what was it again you came by for?” “I’m not so sure the Polaskans were using military-grade orbs,” she said. “Maybe we aren’t finding answers because we’re looking in the wrong place.” Lehrgen looked at her skeptically. “Civilian-grade can’t make explosions of the caliber we measured. They’re specifically designed that way. Everyone knows that.” “Do they?” Lehrgen didn’t reply, only waited for her to elaborate. “Everyone was taught that,” she stressed. “Everyone thinks they know it. But only the people that’ve tried making as big an explosion as they can with a civilian orb know it for a fact. Even then, they’d need to be in the top percentile of magical skill to be sure it’s impossible, not just difficult.” Tanya waited and watched as the same gears that had turned in her head twenty minutes ago whirred around in Lehrgen’s. During the war, she’d been among the highest-ranked magical officers. Very few mages remained in service now that they were reduced to working as regular soldiers. Private industry was a more attractive job option without the perks mages were used to enjoying. For that reason, almost no one tasked with discovering the truth of how their rebel population had succeeded in downing bridges had any hands-on experience with magic. Those that did were hampered by a lifelong bias. Information, correct or not, that was impressed on a child’s mind over and over again was hard to forget once you became an adult that otherwise might know better. Her experience as the sole person who’d digested the facts and fictions about magic with a rational adult’s mind gave her an advantage in discovering the truth. If she had to guess, pure desperation - not a situation mages handling civilian wares were accustomed to - had done the same for the Polaskans. “You’re right,” Lehrgen conceded. “Or at least you have enough of a chance of being right we should look into it.” "If I may volunteer myself for the task?" she requested. She wasn’t thrilled at the idea of leaving the proof of her theorem up to someone else, especially because few mages could match her spell-casting abilities. “You’re underage,” Lehrgen said, eyeing her critically. “Not technically, actually,” Tanya replied. Out of a passing interest, she’d looked into what the letter of the law had to say on the matter. “Non-military companies can’t hire me to use a civilian orb. The military couldn’t hire me to use one of our proprietary models, were we to still have them. But legally, you can give me access to a lower-grade computation orb.” “Since you bothered to look it up, I’m sure you’d know,” Lehrgen sighed, flipping his pen back and forth in his hand. When it came to a stop, he looked up. “A thorough test isn’t going to rely on spells usable only by elite mages. You can observe and make suggestions to someone else, but for now, that’s as close as I want you to get to making explosions again.” Tanya smiled indulgently at his lingering dislike for abusing a loophole to put a weapon back into her hands, and with that, she graciously conceded the point. The more pressing concern was what an average mage could do with a commercially available orb, not the maximum damage it was theoretically possible to inflict. While she didn’t love the idea of making a living off the magic Being X had given her for the crime of pointing out her former world didn’t operate unscientifically, having access to magic when she needed it had become something of a security blanket. Besides putting an end to her daily commute through volleys of enemy fire, she thanked the end of the war for putting her “holy relic” exactly where relics belonged: locked up and jealously guarded. Her Type 97 she’d been less enthusiastic about relinquishing. As of yet, she was too young to buy or register herself as the owner of one of the orbs available for purchase by the general public. Before that, the real problem preventing her from owning one was cost. So long as peace continued its reign, today might have marked the only time she’d channel mana through a device in the next two decades. “If you don’t have anything more important, I can put a call in right now to find a suitable person to do the testing this afternoon.” Tanya shook her head, and Lehrgen’s finger started rotating its way through the numbers on his phone. “We’ll head out after I let Romel know,” he said, waiting for the call to connect. "We should have an answer one way or another by the end of the day," she cautioned, preferring to invite as few witnesses as possible to an event that might end in failure. "If he hears we went to blow things up for research purposes and didn't invite him, we might as well might as well start drafting our resignation letters," Lehrgen replied with a wry smile, and Tanya couldn't help a short huff of laughter from escaping at the half-serious joke. "Do you mind finding Sauer and asking him to get a car ready?" Tanya sighed internally and headed off to do as bidden. There was little point to avoiding someone she saw nearly every day. Her frequent contact with the man in question, she was convinced, was a part of her current predicament. For the entirety of their working history, Sauer had been a flirt. Attractiveness, rank, marital status, age, and oftentimes gender - she’d seen him do it to Lehrgen more than once - were no barrier to being on the receiving end of the playful smiles or eye movements he was fond of making towards whoever he was talking to. She’d long ago learned to chalk it up to an annoying habit and not take it personally. That was, until recently. Her conscious mind hadn’t gotten the messages Sauer inadvertently sent out at all hours of the day. Her subconscious mind was beginning to hear them loud and clear. Were Sauer to maintain a more standard professional demeanor, she was sure this wouldn’t have become an issue that required her attention. Tanya rounded the corner, dreading each step that took her closer to him. The really frustrating part was that there was nothing she could do. Sauer could go as far as to put his hands wherever he pleased on her, and the minute she complained, she was more likely to be the one fired for raising a fuss about getting some friendly attention. Tanya had never really stopped finding the female form an appealing one to look at. What it had taken her some time to realize was that “look at” might be the extent of it. Originally, she’d had a host of factors to explain that. Delayed puberty, for one. After that resolved itself, she’d remained unsure whether her specific biology was lacking in motivation compared to her last body, or if her biology as a woman made the motivation easier to ignore and less physically demanding to experience. Either way, she’d counted herself lucky. From an evolutionary standpoint, having a healthy sex drive wasn’t irrational; in her case, having one wasn’t going to improve her circumstances, thus, she was happy to miss out on the opportunity to act irrationally because of it. Last month, a conversation she’d unwillingly participated in between Visha and Elya had called into question whether appreciating the physique of attractive women meant what she’d assumed it did. While flipping through a magazine, Elya had commented that she was jealous the circumference of her chest wasn’t more understated and elegant, like the woman in the photo she was looking at. Visha had eyed Elya longingly, then given an unsympathetic reply that she was envious of the other woman’s more generous proportions. Their discussion had devolved into an assessment of the attractive point of each other’s bodies, and those of the various women populating Elya’s fashion magazines. Tanya had gotten points for her “arresting eyes” and the lean-muscled thighs Elya reported would fill out the lingerie stockings she’d just bought more gracefully than hers did. The only body parts Visha and Elya didn’t seem to find attractive on women was their own. Evidently, despite neither professing much prurient curiosity about other women, they were more than capable of finding them aesthetically appealing in a way Tanya had assumed was more unique to her circumstances. Actually, the only unique thing about her had been that she’d expressed an overall satisfaction with the way she looked. Saying so had briefly stunned both Visha and Elya into silence. That revelation had been fine by Tanya. If anything, it made it easier to drop her guard a little. There was no harm in a lingering look or a complimentary assessment directed at another woman; she didn’t have to worry as much that it could be taken as the tip of the iceberg. She had complete freedom to pursue many men’s dream of perusing a bathhouse full of undressed women without anyone caring, and the irony was, she couldn’t care as much as she wanted to. What was somewhat less fine by her was the other revelation the tail end of summer had brought for her on a similar topic. Over what constituted approximately the last year, Tanya had a handful of instances where she’d woken up with the fractured memory of an unmentionable dream. That had been her sole sign she wasn’t completely immune to the charm of earthly delights. Whether the subjects of her imaginations had been real people known to her or not, she hadn’t been able to say. Her mind’s eye hadn’t been very good at focusing on faces. Because of that, she’d also remained innocent as to which party to the dance she was implicitly identifying with. While they’d always featured a man and a woman, it had seemed just as likely she was imagining herself as the former. Maybe more likely, since that was where all the practical experience her dreams had to draw on came from. Recently, she’d been robbed of that illusion. Thankfully, no man of her dreams had been recognizable as someone she knew. She had a bad feeling that had the potential to change the longer she spent subjected to Sauer’s mildly-inappropriate-for-work behaviors. Tanya was completely uninterested in that kind of relationship with a coworker, and Sauer more than most, on every level. She didn’t relish the thought of backtracking on that to say she was uninterested on every level but one. Arriving at his desk, Tanya relayed the instructions for Sauer to get a car ready, and then was off to return her half-eaten salad to the icebox before it spoiled. She took some comfort in the thought that with such a wide variety of good candidates to choose from, Sauer was never going to look twice at a woman like her, whose culinary talents were confined to making slow but precise cuts on vegetables so all the pieces came out uniformly sized. How she’d respond to him were he to intentionally lay it on thick was something she didn’t care to find out. Had Tanya’s lifelong dream been to settle down and start a family, this turn of events might be welcome. Slightly awkward, but welcome. As it stood, at most she could see herself getting to the same place as her last life, where on occasion she’d craved a degree of physical intimacy with a fellow human being. The difference was, she was now in a worse position to go about achieving it. In the sense of directly pursuing the goal, she had an advantage over her former life. Surely, were she to take herself to the nearest bar and announce her intention to spend the evening with someone with no strings attached, she’d find no shortage of willing participants. Actually, she could get paid for it. The real complications were just about everything else. Compared to what she was used to, she would be more vulnerable, put herself at risk for more consequences, both physical and social, be the subject of potentially demeaning thoughts, have to constantly be vigilant about attempts to maintain whatever boundaries she’d set for the experience, not to mention she’d be erasing another part of the person who would have categorically refused to enter a relationship with a man, once upon a time. Beyond that, she had to wonder how many men in her vicinity knew that women could enjoy the experience too, let alone thought that they should. That this fiasco was the result of Being X’s meddling wasn’t up for debate, all she was in the dark about was how intentional this result had been. That made the whole situation even less palatable to contemplate. For the most part, she should be able to achieve what she might one day desire - a night passed in company - while avoiding what she didn’t desire - the various stressors - by seeking female companionship regardless. She didn’t have the body she was used to, she wasn’t enticed by the thought of doing things with female bodies the way she used to be, and neither of those meant she suddenly found the idea off-putting. It would be akin to taking a job she was less passionate about, but compensated her better for her effort. If the point was to get paid - or in this case, have an enjoyable outcome to sexual intimacy - it was by far her better choice. Her hesitation on that front was two-fold. First, the non-negligible reputational risk. Rationally, that was the only consideration. Personally, she knew there to be another objection, the same one that had prevented her from taking matters into her own hands, yet, so to speak. With or without another person, the idea of going about her business lacking the body part that used to define the experience was tough to wrap her mind around. Until it became clear she had no other choice, she’d eat her unexciting salads and keep her conscious mind diligently applied to better things and get enough exercise and take cold baths if need be. She’d once been a teenaged boy. This was nothing she couldn’t handle. A hand reached from behind her, grabbing the door to the icebox to keep her from shutting it after she’d put the remnants of her lunch away. “So,” Romel said, his head coming into view a second later. “You found out.” “You could have told me this was up here earlier, sir,” Tanya joked. “I thought you liked me.” Romel made a huff of laughter. “I run the Army,” he said. “Not the office. I had to beg for space in here from the administrative old-timers myself.” “Did you hear from Lehrgen yet?” Tanya inquired. He nodded. “Interesting notion you have.” “I hope I’m not pulling you away from something more important,” she apologized. “I’d be happy to report back once we know the answer. If it’s affirmative, we could schedule a demonstration at a more convenient time.” “Just finishing up some reassessments now that the business with Ostria’s moving towards a good conclusion for us,” he shrugged. “I’ll be there. Thirty minutes or so behind you, but I figure you have to pick up the supplies anyway.” Tanya was slightly ambivalent on whether the conclusion of a push for a renewed single economic zone deserved to be termed “good.” On a national level, it was true - the Empire got an improved economy and another bone of contention taken away from the voting base - which was why she’d originally had high hopes. Ultimately, on an international level, it was shaping up to be more of a move sideways than forwards. The clear and present danger of their Germanian-speaking neighbor had become the rallying cry behind which the Ildoan far-right had consolidated its power. Under other circumstances, electing a successful businessman wouldn’t worry her. This one, though, was a crony capitalist to his core - better at manipulating clients and politicians into making him profitable via corruption than he was at making sound strategic decisions. That didn't bode well for how he planned to remain in power. On top of that, he was a trifecta of authoritarian traits. He controlled the media, he saw enemies everywhere, he made frequent callbacks to the glory of his country’s past. Tanya knew she recognized his name from somewhere. Perhaps one of Mussolini’s financial backers, in another world. Berluscone was an altogether more clownish caricature than the man whose place he’d stolen. She didn’t want to have to take him seriously. She couldn’t afford not to. “It’s a funny coincidence,” she mentioned, both she and Romel turning to walk the same direction down the hallway. “Right before last Christmas I said something to Lehrgen about it being absurd we couldn’t get to an agreement. I guess I wasn’t the only one thinking it. A few weeks later, Countess von Tahnoff wrote her piece.” Romel laughed, shaking his head a little. “What’d you do to get him to take your side on that?” “Who? Lehrgen?” “Of course Lehrgen.” “I…” Tanya began, struggling to understand what kind of answer Romel was looking for. Lehrgen must have been more of a revanchist than he’d let on if Romel was so surprised. Even better that she’d gotten him to see the light. “I...I...made a sound and convincing argument?” “You are a miracle worker, Degurechaff.” Tanya glanced up skeptically to her right. “Not really. In the end, it was just a coincidence someone with a bigger audience stepped in.” “Coincidence my ass,” Romel snorted. “Those two practically grew up together. She probably owed him a favor from way back when that he called in or something. They went together to the same Christmas party Schleichel was at.” “Then why wouldn’t Lehrgen have said something?” she asked, completely taken aback by the deception. “Especially after I told him I’d like to meet Countess von Tahnoff.” “That might have been the problem,” Romel chuckled. “I’m sure the two of them already have their disagreements on policy they overlook for the sake of friendship. I don’t get the sense she’s the type to look kindly on him taking you under his wing.” Tanya sighed in disappointment at the complication and said her goodbyes to Romel for the next hour or so. Tahnoff had been a well-known voice of opposition to child soldiers. There was no helping that introducing Tanya to her would put Lehrgen in an awkward spot. Tanya descended to the street and found her party waiting for her there, including a new face. "Captain Christine Backhaus," the woman introduced herself, sticking out a hand to shake. Their designated orb tester was one of the rare remaining women in uniform. With the aerial branch shut down, they were restricted to staff positions. Few enough soldiers qualified for those to begin with, and they rarely went to women. Backhaus looked to be in her late forties, sturdily built, with brown hair already half-gray pulled into a tight braid. Between the sensible appearance and the resume she must have had to be selected for renewed service, Tanya was confident she was dealing with a professional of high caliber. One that would do a good job as her stand-in, most importantly. Tanya gave her name in return and reached out a hand back, but Backhaus’s was withdrawn so quickly their fingers didn’t brush. "It's an honor, ma'am,” she said, with a precise salute. Tanya sketched a salute of her own with a bemused smile. Everyone in her department had gotten used to her presence. She no longer earned startled reactions very often. Their group got into the car and started off in the direction of their first stop. The Bureau of Controlled Goods was something of a catchall for what citizens required permission, a certain age, or a license to obtain. Alcohol, drugs, firearms, and in their case, orbs. They were the titular experts on the statutes surrounding civilian ones. The man that greeted them, one Alfred Klusmann, had her convinced their new government was as wasteful with her tax dollars as their last. Pale, flabby, owlish eyes blinking behind thick glasses, hair parted so unfashionably she could notice, a curious mixture of self-important and servile, he was the epitome of a complacent lifelong bureaucrat. Despite Lehrgen mentioning that the ladies were the mages of the bunch, Klusmann continued to address himself and his questions exclusively towards their General, like Lehrgen was the only person there that mattered. It didn’t improve Tanya’s opinion of the man. Aggravating as that was, she couldn’t prevent her lips from curling up into a grin. This was who they had in charge of testing commercial orbs. She was more confident than ever that her prediction of a breakdown in the regulatory environment was on the money. After Lehrgen asked for access to the Bureau’s supply of orbs they kept for testing, Klusmann requested identification from everyone. Including, as he put it with a dismissive glance Tanya’s direction, “the assistant.” He held onto the document she presented for an unusual length of time. She wasn’t wholly surprised. She had to hassle another branch full of illustriously efficient civil service employees to get an identification card issued prior to turning twenty and becoming a full-fledged citizen. There was probably something wrong with it. “M-my apologies,” he said, with an obsequious dip of his head. “I didn’t recognize you. I - hold on.” He turned and opened a drawer. The next thing Tanya knew, she was face-to-face with her most humiliating moment once again, being begged for her signature on a poster of her, long hair curled and red dress on, smile plastered on her face. Her brief curiosity over what kind of person would hold onto a propaganda announcement with a stupid-looking little girl on it was quickly squashed by the realization of exactly what type of person would do it. She was more thankful than ever she’d had a light lunch. A heavier meal, and she’d be suffering from an upset stomach right about now. She was yearning to recapture her status from a couple minutes ago as “the assistant.” As the assistant, her knowledge over how her image was being profaned, both her former and likely her current one too, had been placed blissfully in the “out of sight, out of mind” part of her brain. "Mr. Klusmann," Captain Backhaus snapped, before Tanya could get her gaping mouth to respond. “We're here on official business. Degurechaff is a decorated hero, not a showpiece." Tanya was grateful for the display of solidarity. At times like these, women had to stick together. Being a career type herself, Backhaus had undoubtedly struggled against having her value reduced to how pretty she was and how pleasantly she made people feel when she smiled. Honestly, Tanya couldn’t wait to reach middle age. "A-apologies," Klusmann winced, withdrawing the hated print. "But orbs aren't just my work, they're my favorite hobby. Ms. Degurechaff performed miracles with the Type 97, things the mechanics shouldn't allow for. I assure you, I fully respect her talents." An orb otaku was better than the alternative, and yet somehow, she didn’t feel much better because of it. Maybe if she could be positive that fighting side by side was the only way he’d ever imagined them together. Soon enough, another argument ensued over Lehrgen’s intention to take the orbs offsite without the requisite waiting period for the paperwork to be approved. It brought out a side of her boss she didn’t often see, one whose orders weren’t up for debate and had no patience for the person trying to engage him in one. With her, he tended to take a more even-tempered approach to conflict resolution. "Sir, please,” Klusmann said, standing firm on his right to go on a power trip by obstructing them with the shield of official policy. “I'm just trying to do my job." "And I mine," Lehrgen said, with a chilling finality Tanya was sad to say her voice could no longer imitate. “Do I need to remind you that this is a matter of national security? If I could buy all of these at the nearest jeweler I would, but we don't have time to visit every damned shop in Berun hunting down each model. Now, would you like me to get the director of the bureau on the line to let him know that you've declined to give them to me?" With that, they were on their second ride of the day, over to the old Summersdorf artillery field. Tanya quizzed Klusmann on the points of magical history her education was missing. He’d been adamant about accompanying them to keep an eye on his wares, so she might as well make use of him. Backhaus had been equally as adamant about taking the middle seat in the car. A pleasant surprise, since Tanya’s small stature made her more naturally suited to it. Tanya made the mistake of asking Klusmann a sufficiently open-ended question that he began trying to explain everything he knew about magic, not what was directly relevant to their situation. "The short version, please," Lehrgen cut in from the front, his please coming out rather like an or else. After a joint stare-down from the other occupants of the vehicle, Sauer briefly looking over his shoulder included, he got the message and stayed on topic. The crux of the problem, as Tanya understood it, didn’t lie in the people developing orbs so much as it did the conditions under which they’d first been developed. The military had controlled most later advances, once orbs had overtaken non-magical weapons in lethal capacity. Prior to that, they’d been an unregulated side-show of an eccentric product, meant more to show off than accomplish anything of real value. The people originally responsible for setting the baseline metrics against which commercial orbs were measured, to determine they didn’t exceed certain limits, had been designed and performed by men who’d never used them under duress. In a war, say. Because their engineering restricted input - orbs melted down when too much mana went in - but couldn’t do a thing about output, as technical capacities like loss ratios improved, the measurements had been recalibrated without taking into account that a skilled veteran was going to get a more powerful output out of a low input. Up until the last war, aerial combat hadn’t advanced enough as a field to give the men coming home widespread knowledge of ultra-efficient spell construction. Since then, the oversight had been allowed to persist for two reasons. First, as she’d earlier intuited, a life of crime wasn’t a very attractive option for mages. Someone with the bank account to purchase an orb outright for personal use had little incentive to commit nefarious deeds for money. The remainder of the mage population was accessing orbs on company time and on company property, and likewise had little incentive to do anything that could cost them their job. Second was a perennial problem infesting back-end bureaucratic government functions: they didn’t tend to get the cream of the crop sending in job applications. Ambitious personalities saw more opportunity elsewhere. That was how they’d ended up with a Tester-in-Chief who’d missed out on wartime service due to weak lungs. Expecting Klusmann, no matter how brilliant of an academic mage he might be, to compete with a veteran was something like asking an Olympic medalist in figure-skating to go win the gold in gymnastics. Sure, some of the fundamental requirements were similar - strength, balance, artistry, flexibility, tolerance for landing face-first on a hard surface - but it was the details that made it a different sport. A mage whose life had never depended on the quality of their artillery spells was never going to think the same way as one who'd flown through a hailstorm of bullets. It wasn’t really Klusmann’s fault he couldn't compete. The guy before him had been a retired corporal who’d done no more than basic aerial observations. It seemed there was more ground to cover than Tanya had estimated. She closed her eyes to block distractions while she mentally devised a testing plan for Backhaus to follow. "I'm sure you'll be interested to hear, the Unified States has a new model coming out soon, it's really something-" “I’m thinking,” Tanya interrupted, lifting a hand to make a stop signal without bothering to open her eyes. "You know, you're not very much like I imagined you,” Klusmann continued, when she failed to reply. “You looked very charming in the poster.” Well, if that wasn’t the best news she’d heard all day, she didn’t know what qualified. The sound of Lehrgen trying not to laugh in the front caught her attention. “Hey,” she said with a hurt frown in his direction when he peeked over a shoulder. It wasn’t right for him to be amused by her struggle to be taken seriously. Romel was already there when they arrived. They followed his car along a winding pat that led out to an abandoned construction site. "We were building a new observation tower when the war ended. It's not the same as a bridge, but steel beams are steel beams," he said with a shrug. "I've taken the liberty of authorizing its demolition." Aside from the half-built tower, her quick survey indicated that the detritus of the unfinished construction provided an ample number of targets. Wooden crates and pallets, corrugated paneling, even an old truck. A few members of Summersdorf's security guards had helpfully provided a range of weapons and ammunition laid out alongside a few types of explosives. Tanya let her eyes roam over the goods, then turned to the man she had to grudgingly acknowledge as an expert on the subject. "What's the most common orb in circulation?" "That would be the Bentzinger Drachen, Ms. Degurechaff, it's a beautiful model, the-" "Thank you," she interrupted. He could probably go on about it for days if no one stopped him. "Let's start with that one." Klusmann nodded, withdrawing a silk bag from the ornamental wooden box he'd packed the orbs into. "Please be careful, if you would, these can't handle the sort of strain you're used to putting on them," he warned Captain Backhaus. Tanya kept her silence and watched while the older woman took the orb in hand, selected a rifle, loaded it, then trained it on a pile of crates. The spell she built was uninspired but reasonably efficient. It was the product of a mage who'd survived a war, not one who'd never left an office. Backhaus squeezed the trigger, and a second later the stack of wood exploded in a spectacularly anticlimactic fashion. Only a few pieces hurdled outwards from the scene; the rest collapsed in on itself. "It...it shouldn't be able to do that," Klusmann said weakly. Tanya had never met a mage who got shaken up by such a minor detonation. It might have been more deadly than intended, but she could have made a homemade bomb with more power using nothing but ingredients from her local pharmacy. Backhaus moved on to the next target - a basic mental container. The spell-building went faster this time, in a matter of seconds her bullet sailing towards her chosen victim. It tore a meter-wide hole through the metal where the spell had been focused. Otherwise, it didn’t compromise the material. Next was the real test, the unfinished tower. A spell, a pull of the trigger, and - nothing. Well, not nothing. It took a small chunk out of the beam, but structurally, everything held together without issue. A few mages aiming at once might generate enough power to damage a single beam at a time. That would take upwards of ten minutes to trigger a collapse. Hot shame pulsed through Tanya's chest at the bad omen. She was going to be judged a failure by a person who’d trusted in her reliability. Backhaus's spells weren't anything special, but the truth was, at best an elite might be able to double the firepower of her most recent one. That wasn’t going to take down infrastructure anytime soon. Tanya had one spot of hope: if the Drachen was the most popular it would stand to reason that it was one of the cheapest. That introduced the possibility of it being one of the weakest. "In your professional opinion, which orb is most powerful?" Tanya asked, lifting her head. "Well, that new American orb will be when it comes on the market," Klusmann told her, apparently still hurt that she hadn't wanted to hear about it. "For now, I'd say the Commonwealth's newest model, the Scofield Victoria." Goddammit, Tanya cursed, wishing there was something in front of her to kick, when the results failed to be significantly different on the second round. The explosions had been more powerful, both due to the orb and slight improvements to spell design, and they still weren't near enough to threaten sturdy buildings. "There were traces of explosives found at the same sites where magic was detected, correct?" Tanya asked, groping for another explanation. "Yes," Romel answered. “Trace, though. Nothing significant.” Tanya looked over the photographs of the bridges again. Owing to the twisted and torn metal on the non-magically destroyed ones, the consensus was that the rebels lacked for explosives. They’d let gravity do the work after weakening the supports. By contrast, the ones marked as involving magic showed clean lines of separation. “I’m thinking they used a small initial explosion and enhanced it,” she postulated. While her mind tried to parse through the sheer volume of information she knew for what combinations of spells were possible and sort them by the most likely, Lehrgen leaned over her shoulder to have a look. “Shaped,” he said, nodding to himself while he interrupted her with an answer. “Like how the mines do it.” Tanya turned her head up towards him and raised an eyebrow. For someone with no experience in magic or mining, he came off quite confident in his guess. “My brother’s wife’s father was looking at buying one. Otto made me go along on the tour so I could talk to his father-in-law all day and he didn’t have to. The mages there work with bigger explosions, but they shape the detonations to shear off exactly what they want. Oberschlesia’s a mining province. It’s probably the experience most of these guys have.” “Respectfully, sir, that alone wouldn’t be enough,” Backhaus interjected, clearing her throat. “No,” Tanya agreed. “No, but if you combined it with another spell, maybe so.” “Can these orbs handle dual-casting?” Lehrgen asked Klusmann, jerking his head at what was on the table. “I don’t see why not,” Tanya answered for him. “If all that’s limited is mana input, there’s no reason you couldn’t make two weaker spells out of it.” She declined to elaborate further, as doing so would partially implicate her in the crime. Prior to the war, casting multiple offensive spells simultaneously hadn’t been seen as particularly possible. She’d learned because of the Type 95. From there she’d gotten her battalion up to speed. By the end, the skill had disseminated widely enough for most Imperial mages to have a basic familiarity with it. And now, some of those mages were no longer citizens of theirs. Tanya walked over to the table with the orbs on it and picked one up over Klusmann’s objections. Romel dealt with that for her. Without actualizing any spells, she checked each orb to see how it handled the most efficiently-compressed double-action formula she could come up with. With the Type 95, she'd never needed to worry about constructing spells in a way that maximized efficiency. When she'd used the Type 97, she would have struggled to keep up with her men if she hadn't come up with some creative ways of minimizing expenditure. She was somewhat above average when it came to her mana capacity, but without the Type 95 she didn't have enough to easily compete with monsters like Visha and Weiss. She’d been one of the best at layered spellwork for that reason. After three years without doing any, she had to admit what she came up with wasn’t her best work. Then again, as Lehrgen had put it, not everyone was her. She was better off with a formula more achievable for the average mage. "Here," she said after she was done, presenting the orb with which she'd been able to construct the most potent spell. "What's this one?" "That would be the Kienzel 4," Klusmann replied. "Used for mainly for mining and smelting." "Common in Oberschlesia then, I take it?" He tapped his chin. "It's an older model, so it's not as popular anymore, but yes, at one point most of the big mining operations in the area would have owned a number of them." "Try this one," she said, handing it over to Backhaus. "Did you see the spell I made? Can you do that?" The other woman nodded, and Tanya ran towards the watchtower as fast as her legs could carry her to tape an explosive charge on. She was rewarded with a satisfying crack a minute later, the tower listing a few degrees to the left as one of its supports was severed. A hand clapped down on her shoulder and she looked up, seeing Romel smiling down at her. "Sounds like I owe someone a drink." Sauer was entrusted with the duty of choosing a venue for their festivities. Klusmann wasn’t extended an offer to join, only given his orbs back and made to swear up and down he wouldn’t mention anything until further notice. Backhaus would have made a welcome presence, had she not been the caretaker for a nephew whom she needed to get home to. The war had left him parentless. The beer hall Sauer led them to was partially underground and smelled it. The scent of musty basement, she was assured, was more than made up for by the beer selection. The widest in the city, according to their connoisseur of such fine establishments. Feeling adventurous, Tanya took a stab at the menu quite literally and ordered what her finger landed on. After Romel opened up his wallet and slapped a few bills into the hands of the younger men with an admonition that they still needed to be fit to drive by the end, she was left alone with her two superiors and a mug of cold beer. "So," Romel asked, wiping his mouth after he drained almost half his glass in one go. "How much damage could most of those orbs do?" "I expect that a member of my battalion could have roughly doubled the output of what you saw today, given time to optimize the spell," Tanya answered promptly, already having given consideration to that question during the car ride. "Besides that, a basic optical illusion could be maintained with most of the orbs. Small alterations to facial features and hair color would be all it takes to make someone disappear into the crowd, and someone in possession of one could maintain full-body strength enhancement and pain-blocking spells almost indefinitely." Presumably, her lawmakers would eventually get around to putting stricter limits in place. For now, confiscating all commercial orbs would send the country back into the throes of economic instability. If there was a faster way for a party to get itself voted out of office than getting its voters laid off, she didn’t know it. “What we really need to think about is what else you can hide besides people,” Tanya continued, already envisioning a future in which troubles in the Middle East referred to the area straddling Central and Eastern Europa. A shaped charge made out of accessible materials pretty much described an IED. Storage locations near mines could disguise stockpiles using illusions, without making it obvious the ambient magic was out-of-the-ordinary. A dedicated force with local support operating in a rural area had proven impossible for much more well-equipped armies than theirs to root out. “Not a very honorable way of fighting,” Romel frowned, looking disgusted by the thought any self-respecting group would resort to such tactics. That kind of preference for by-the-book methodology might turn out to be a real Achilles’ heel. That was, if she didn’t take matters into her own hands and apply some more work to convincing their fearless leader it was a real possibility he needed to consider. “No,” she agreed. “But effective, relatively speaking, if you’re understaffed and outgunned.” “I don’t see that a war could be won that way,” he disagreed. “That’s not the point,” she shook her head. “The point is to make it unwinnable for the other party. You bank on sending more money and more men to fight an unwinnable war becoming unpopular with whoever it is that’s doing the sending.” “The poor man’s version of our grand strategy,” Romel laughed. “Alright, I see.” Tanya gave a brief overview of what the next century of guerrilla warfare had in store for the world’s established power-brokers. In the end, she was given the same admonishment by Romel as she had been by Lehrgen earlier in the day: everyone wasn’t her. Imperial soldiers steeped in the pride of their regular, proper army weren’t going to understand without more instructions, Romel was convinced. Worried that knowledge of how to deal with such threats would disappear with her departure from the Army or Romel’s retirement, he requested a write-up for completeness sake. "Well, as always, you've given me a lot to think about," Romel replied, gulping down the other half of his drink and waving at a server to bring a second round for everyone, despite the fact that neither of his companions were close to being finished with their first. Tanya still had three quarters of her second beer left by the time Romel finished his third, plunked it down on the table, and announced his intention to answer the call of nature before leaving. Lehrgen had kept to himself while she and Romel had talked, making little beyond the occasional concerned facial expression. “You always have something up your sleeve, don’t you?” he sighed once they were alone, giving a half-hearted smile. “Do you think the day will ever come you don’t immediately start thinking of how to revolutionize modern warfare when the chance presents itself?” Knowing how far Lehrgen had gone to try to get them to a world where her mind wasn’t preoccupied by what conflict she was going to die in, the compliment landed more deeply than usual. “Maybe,” she shrugged, looking at her fingers as she tapped them along the side of her glass. “I don’t know. It’s not easy to stop myself from doing it. But I’m starting to think it might be possible. I - umm - thanks. For that.” The stare she earned in return was concentrated and intense in a way Lehrgen didn’t normally get. Tanya wasn’t the only one that often had more than one thing on her mind. “You’ve spent a lot of time trying to set me up on a better path than I started off on,” she said, feeling compelled to explain and break the silence. “Although I guess it’s been more effective recently. Anyway…” She sighed and returned to tapping her glass again. “...anyway, I heard it might have been you that put the bug in Countess von Tahnoff’s ear about Ostria on my behalf. I hope I didn’t put you up to much trouble over it.” “No, not really,” he laughed. “She’s very particular, though, so you have to know how to push her buttons right. But I think I’ve had that figured out since I was about thirteen. Her family’s much larger estate abutted ours. We used to see quite a lot of each other. Especially in the winter. I mean, you saw what winters out east are like. There is nothing to do.” Tanya nodded in agreement to both sentiments. Eastern winters encouraged one to stay indoors, and knowing the general nature of middle schoolers, it wasn’t at all surprising that Lehrgen had put up with being confined for long periods of time by learning how to piss off his neighbor as much as humanly possible. “I’ll admit it was a bit bothersome she decided to spend the next day telling me what was wrong with my house,” he went on. Seeing as how they’d spent the evening together and then she’d been at his house the next day, Tanya revised her initial impression of what Lehrgen had likely meant about learning to press the friendly neighbor-girl’s buttons during those long winters with nothing else to do. For all she knew there’d been some minor scandal over it before she was born and that’s why the countess had never married. It was strange to think Lehrgen no longer saw her as so young that hinting at the topic was off-limits. Even stranger, as someone with experience being a man herself, that he was the one cajoling favors out of women that way and not the other way around. She had to wonder- I shouldn’t wonder, she told herself. She could no longer guarantee such thoughts would stay in the realm of scientific curiosity where they belonged. The last thing she wanted was to go acquiring more not-safe-for-working-with colleagues. Tanya quickly switched their conversation to the most readily available topic: inquiring after Countess von Tahnoff’s opinions on wallpaper. When Lehrgen came to a confused finish after his confused start over why she cared how his house was decorated, he glanced in Sauer’s direction. Sauer wasn’t visible, but it was easy to tell where he was by the crowd at one end of the bar. “Time to ruin someone’s evening,” Lehrgen said. “Is it bad that sometimes I enjoy it?” “He deserves it,” Tanya replied, letting her annoyance seep into her tone. Lehrgen didn’t say anything, only looked back and forth between her and Sauer a couple times. Whenever she expressed she didn’t like his flirting, the automatic assumption was that she was jealous. “I have no interest in him,” Tanya said firmly. “If that’s what you’re wondering.” “Sorry,” he coughed. “Just thought I’d better make sure. It could put me in a difficult position.” She waved goodbye with an understanding smile. No boss would want their left hand romantically involved with the right. Workplace relationships brought nothing but drama. Especially ones kept so close to home. 




 

 My Little Cronies: Friendship is Magic






 "A good friend will always stab you in the front." 
 
 
 November 14, 1931Thomashaus, Imperial Capital Berun
 
Thick clouds of smoke - other people’s smoke, cigarette, cigar, pipe - prickled at Erich von Lehrgen’s eyes, and then at his lungs, never as pleasant as his own, never. He fumbled in the unfamiliar pocket of his tuxedo, rid, for once, of his uniform, searching for the silver cartridge holding his personal selection of nicotine. Inhaling the brand of his choosing was the only defense he’d ever found against suffocating on everyone else’s. Sometimes - rarely, really, on the rare occasion he’d been in nature long enough to reset his senses, he came home and understood why some people couldn’t stand smoking in any form. No matter the prevailing temperature, he’d go through and open every window. Inevitably, it wasn’t quite enough. Eventually, he’d turn back to the old remedy, like taking a drink with breakfast to cure a hangover, light a cigarette and know he was only adding to the problem in the long run for the sake of temporary relief. He paused mid-stride to pull the cartridge fully out of his pocket so he could pry the stubborn sides of it apart with both hands. Almost immediately, one of his feet went forward to keep him upright when he felt a body collide with his, followed by a mumbled apology before the man disappeared into the crowd. He should have expected it. He was not in his uniform. Here, at the standard venue for his social club, he was nothing but a nondescript black suit, one in a sea of many, stopped inconveniently in the middle of people shuffling to and from parts of the room. He retreated toward a wall to open the case and get a cigarette lit. From his relatively defensible location, his eyes surveilled the room for the person he wanted to see. He saw what he was looking for, the shock of hair so white-blond it would be indistinguishable with gray after it turned, peeking out over the top of a high-backed chair. Erich was tall, even considering he’d benefited from a well-rounded diet as he grew. Brushing the limits of two hundred and ten centimeters, Klaus made him look almost diminutive by comparison. His family name - von Einhorn - was properly Germanian, but long ago over drinks Erich and his friend had roared with laughter as they’d concluded that somewhere along the line there’d been an issue of paternity, and a strapping servant of either Legadonian or Baltic stock had provided the genes meant to come from the lord of the estate. Erich’s vote was for the latter. Erich gestured to a passing server. Two tawny-toned whiskies in his hands later, he quietly approached, came around to the side so Klaus could see he was there and the person occupying the other chair couldn’t. “Yes, but if Goerne’s division had only had a commander worth a damn, they would’ve rolled in from the left flank and the whole thing would’ve been decided differently,” Klaus’s companion, the former Colonel Palle, said. Erich caught Klaus’s eye and smiled. Palle did practically nothing besides defend his war record to anyone who’d hear. He wasn’t wrong, precisely. Had Goerne’s men come to reinforce him, he wouldn’t be on the defense now. He wasn’t wrong. Just insane for thinking anyone lacking omniscience wouldn’t have stayed put the same as Goerne had and could therefore be relegated into the category of commanders who weren’t “worth a damn.” “I’m sure you’re right, Friedrich,” Klaus mollified. “Only I did hear Fröschmann saying the opposite earlier. You’re trying to convince the wrong man.” Quick as lightning, Palle shot up from his seat with an affronted grunt. Right on cue, Klaus’s eyes slid over to the far corner of the room, where Fröschmann was standing with his back to them. Palle stalked off, leaving his seat unoccupied for Erich to take. “You know,” Klaus said, watching Palle shoulder his way through the crowd. “I expect he’s hoping I’ll vindicate his record in my next book.” “I expect you’re right,” Erich replied. He passed one the of the glasses he was holding across to his friend. “Will you?” “God no,” Klaus spat out, nearly choking on his drink while he laughed at the thought. “I’ll say nothing on the subject until after the man’s in his grave. Else he’ll never stop harassing me for a correction.” “Might be a while,” Erich hummed. He settled further into his seat, crossed an ankle over a knee, felt old leather give a bit more behind his back. “Palle’s not all that old yet.” “No, see,” Klaus began, shaking his head with a sip of his drink, “he wants to be remembered for something. Perfect target for joining up with some idiot politician making treasonous noises about the legitimacy of our government. Then the police will take care of the rest. I only hope he does it soon.” “Shot dead in the street for the crime of annoying you,” Erich nodded in false agreement. “How magnanimous.” “Obviously, in this scenario his crime is sedition,” Klaus laughed. “Get it straight. Anyway, if you’d had to sit through the entire oration you gave me an excuse to interrupt - thanks for that, by the way - I’m sure you’d agree.” A thought occurred to him then, one so hilarious he couldn’t help it bubbling up and out, making it so he had to catch his breath before he could share. “Klaus,” he got out, finally, around hiccuping heaves of air. “Klaus. If I were to wish death upon every coworker of mine who’s told me an absolutely baseless story about how they would’ve won a battle if it weren’t for someone else’s incompetence, I think the only one I’d have left is the one I’ve historically liked the least. You’re getting off lightly.” It never took long for them to reach the point they’d now hit, both laughing madly into their drinks over something stupid the other’d said. Always the most mature of other friends their age, always the serious one, always the last to arrive at the bar after work and the first to leave, except, somehow, when they were together, and then they competed over being the opposite. On the surface, Klaus was Erich’s most obvious friendship. In truth, it was possibly his least likely. “That Degurechaff girl, was it?” Klaus sighed, regaining his composure An oversized pale white hand trying to physically wipe the grin off his face. He corrected himself before Erich objected. “No. She’s not around anymore, so it has to be someone else. Do tell.” “No,” Lehrgen said, not in the mood to worsen the lie of omission he was already stuck in. It was over twenty years now since they’d met, more than enough time to familiarize himself with Klaus’s weaknesses. He’d begun his obvious-unlikely friendship wanting to strangle Klaus on account of his historical curiosity. They weren’t so much different now than they’d been at sixteen, arguing over who was going to be checking a book out of the library. There’d been an assignment due on Monday. For that assignment, Erich had needed to reference a rather obscure book on Napoleon’s Russland campaign. When he’d originally gone to the school library, early as he could, it had been checked out. Every time he went back, someone else had it. By then an upperclassman and an exemplary one at that, Cadet von Lehrgen, as he’d been then, had earned the privilege of having Sundays to himself and half of Saturdays too. Finally, in a last act of desperation, he’d used his freedom on Saturday to go hunt down the title in the city’s central library, only to find someone else’s hand pulling it off the shelf when he got there, like Fate had contrived for him not to be able to finish his paper and was taunting him over it by giving the book he needed to the one person on Earth who wanted to read it purely for pleasure. They’d argued about it, there, between the stacks, dust motes dancing in the dim light from a far window each time the angry flail of an arm disturbed their rest. Argued themselves blue in the face, argued about who had more of a right to it, how libraries were supposed to work, first come, first serve, how life was supposed to work, ceding whimsy to duty. They’d argued until a prim and matronly librarian, all business with her black hair pulled back and blacker dress ironed stiff-straight, had come to confiscate the book, smack both on the back of the head with it - rather hard, as he recalled - and tell them under no uncertain terms would either be reading it if they didn’t quiet down. In that moment of enforced silence under the scornful eye of their monitor, feeling like a disobedient child for the first time in years, it had been easy to see just how much of a child he really was being. He’d gotten distracted from what actually mattered - gaining possession of the book - by the temptation of making the other boy say you’re right, I’m wrong, you win. “Klaus, I’m disappointed in you,” the librarian had told the blond boy, thin lips pulled tight in anger. “And you as well, Mr….?” “von Lehrgen. Erich.” “von Lehrgen?” he’d heard, Klaus peering around the librarian to look at him. “Same family that’s got officers going back generations?” “Yes, but nobody famous. At all.” “There was a Gerd,and a Lothar, yes? An Adolf, if I’m remembering right. No, maybe Alfred.” “I don’t think I’ve ever met anyone who could pull those names off the top of their head,” Erich had said, begrudging the small laugh his erstwhile enemy had gotten out of him. “I’m not so sure I could.” “Well, you read enough, you see the same names now and again, even if it’s just a passing mention of the order of battle or something.” “You must be getting to the end of the library if you know that much.” The librarian had given a humored sniff of agreement to that. Erich’s eyes had drifted over to the object of their disagreement held in her hands, its red cover barely worn despite its age. “Explains why you’d want that.” “Well, I’m going to be a historian, you know,” Klaus had rushed on, head bobbing excitedly, last vestiges of anger gone. “Imperial history especially. So of course I want to know about the battles that made it. Not really interested in making history myself, but I like reading about it. And writing.” “Sorry,” Erich had apologized, without rancor, gracefully losing the battle in the hopes of winning the war. “You’re right. You got to it before me.” He’d nodded to the librarian, then at Klaus, waiting until the other boy had accepted the book as a token of apology before continuing on. “Only I did need it for a paper. All I need’s a few lines. Probably take me less than an hour. It’s due on Monday and I’m not sure how it goes in regular school, but failure to execute your duties in a timely fashion gets me more than a slap with a ruler.” Erich had laughed then, not a wholly fake one either. “Still, you seem so excited about reading that I think keeping you from it is a worse punishment than whatever’s waiting for me.” “I could tell you about regular school, if you like,” Klaus had said. He’d extended the book from his chest but kept both hands on it, ready to pull it back. “If you tell me about yours. It’s where so many people started off. I only know what I’ve read about it, and, well - let’s be honest, our best authors aren’t exactly covering a year in the life of the average Army cadet.” “As long as when the time comes, you don’t write about me calling me an average Army cadet,” Erich had chuckled. “Even if that does end up being the truth.” Klaus had handed the book over, biting his lips to keep from laughing aloud and earning further punishment from the librarian. Less than an hour later, as promised, Erich had handed it back. Barely old enough for a beer, they’d plunked themselves down at the first bar they found and started talking. They hadn’t stopped until the owner shooed them out so he could shut down. The curiosity that had driven Klaus to lean out past the librarian and speak those first friendly words to Erich to discover if he was related to some inconsequential string of middling officers hadn’t faded with time. Klaus knew about his disagreements with Tanya in general. How well Erich personally knew her he’d left unmentioned. She was too tantalizing a piece of subject matter for his friend; he and Klaus would hardly be able to talk about anything else. “Come on,” Klaus pled, still curious about Erich’s imaginary least favorite colleague. “You can tell me.” “And then open up a book one day to see you saying we lost the war because of internal discord?” “Well, did we?” “You know the answer to that.” Erich sighed. A puff of smoke came along with it. The ashy haze hung in the over-warm air, rising slowly to join the rest in slow, climbing branches. “Though knowing we were headed for a loss regardless, I wish I’d held my ground firmer back when I had the chance. I mean, I’d argue here and there, but only up to a point.” “Then you wouldn’t be where you are now.” In a single gulp the rest of Klaus’s drink was sent down his throat. Like a medieval clarion, the dull thud of thick glass hitting thicker wood that punctuated the momentary silence when Klaus plunked the empty tumbler down on a table called a waiter to retrieve it. Erich’s attention wandered throughout the room, full of suits cut to the current fashion, a friendly circle joking with each other by the fireplace, tables of cards and billiards visible along the far wall, a heated debate almost close enough for him to hear between men he vaguely recognized as the Minister for Transport and a steel magnate. Imported wine or liquor in every hand, staff swapping finished glasses for full almost as if by magic, the slow, melodic press of piano keys on a Sathié recording ebbing and swelling in the background. “That might not be such a bad thing,” he replied to Klaus, picking up his own glass and looking into the side so that his face reflected in the patterned crystal and showed him back all the versions of himself that might have been had he chosen differently the one time or the other. “I think I could get used to having more of this in my life.” “What would you have gone into after the war, if you hadn’t gone back?” Erich sighed noisily, drew a breath off his cigarette, clinked the last vestiges of ice against the sides of his glass. Abruptly, he uncrossed his legs to stretch them out long in front, sinking down until his chin nearly rested on his chest. “I don’t know. Don’t listen to me. The grass is always greener, that’s all.” Doing exactly as asked, Klaus didn’t listen to him and remained on the subject. “Politics, then?” “Spare me,” Erich groaned, rubbing at his head. “What then?” “I said I don’t know,” Erich sulked. “I’m not sure what else my experience is relevant for anyway. Administration of some kind, I suppose.” “Veteran full colonel with a pristine record could have found something else good to occupy him,” Klaus snorted. “Full colonel!” Erich said, with a deep rumble of laughter up from his chest. “There isn’t a man in the country who doesn’t suspect wartime promotions were more a testament to your ability to stay alive than fitness for the office. We all know someone who ended up two or three ranks too high because everyone more senior ran out of luck more quickly.” He sighed again, swirling his glass once more. “Fairly, I was a major, maybe a fledgling lieutenant colonel. A lateral move out there and I’d have to do half my career over again, and who wants that?” “Don’t go having a midlife crisis on me. We’re too young.” Erich rolled his eyes. “I wasn’t saying I was unhappy with how things are. Just that it wouldn’t have been the end of the world if they turned out differently. On the subject of switching careers, though…” He rose from his seat, motioned for Klaus to do the same. Past the roaring hearth, by the bar with a stop for another drink, then through a throng of people, they found the billiards room. In the average bar, Erich had a handy trick for getting someone to give up their game so he could play. He identified a mediocre player who thought too highly of himself, stood behind him, and gave unsolicited critiques until the man turned to him with an angry I’d like to see you do better, then took the cue stick and proceeded to do so. Tonight, he wasn’t at a venue where it was a good idea to offend a random person so casually. Luckily, a table was free. “I had a favor to ask you,” Erich said, letting Klaus begin the game, silently watching balls roll across green felt as they broke. Klaus turned to look at him for a moment, then leaned back over his cue stick. “Then we should be playing chess instead. Beating you at it puts me in a very favorable mood.” “Yes, but you take it so seriously,” Erich objected. “You won’t let me talk to you while you’re thinking.” “True.” “I’ve been doing a bit of an ongoing side project,” he said, looking at the table, trying to figure out if there was a way to win slowly. “And I think I’ve finally figured out the man I need to speak with. Irony of ironies, I’ve to come to find out he might have been your thesis advisor. I can’t believe I forgot.” “Schmemann?” Erich nodded. Klaus smiled, wisps of bleach-blond hair coming loose when he shook his head. “I doubt you forgot. You probably never knew in the first place. Things got a bit busy for you around that time.” “Can you talk to him for me?” “Ahh,” Klaus winced, either because of the missed shot or the request. “Well, we’ve fallen out-,” “Don’t tell me you’ve had a falling out,” Erich groaned, his own cue stick clacking against the floor for emphasis. “Whatever minor academic quibble it was over, can you just go tell him he’s right?” “Not a falling out, just fallen out of touch.” Klaus clicked his tongue. “It’s been - let’s see - five years, maybe.” “Then you have a perfect reason to reconnect.” “Sure,” Klaus drawled. He backed himself up to lean against a structural support disguised as an architectural feature, the glossy, dark stain of the wood gleaming in muted lamplight. One arm crossed over his middle, the other elbow propped on it for him to hold his drink to his lips, peering at Erich over the top of his glass. “Would help if I knew what we were going to talk about.” “The war denied a number of students the chance to sit for their Abitur,” Erich explained. “I was trying to get that corrected.” “That’s very nice of you,” Klaus chuckled. “Weirdly nice. Marian finally got to you?” “It was my own idea, thank you.” In his distraction at the thought of Marian making anyone a nicer person - a better person yes, but nicer took some poetic license - he missed a shot he hadn’t meant to. The tip of the stick glanced harmlessly off the edge of the cue ball. In a drunken careen, it spun towards the open expanse of the table. Klaus didn’t take up his place immediately. For a moment they stood silent and unmoving, watching for the ball to come to a dead stop. Only then did Klaus heave himself upright and slouch nearer unenthusiastically, a hulking mass of disappointment that his break hadn’t lasted longer. “Only gymnasiums prepare their students to go to university,” Klaus said, circling around until he decided what shot he wanted to take. “To my knowledge there are correspondence courses for graduates of other institutions that decide they want to go on for further education. Is it finding money you need, then, to enroll anyone who qualifies for free?” “That’s the smaller part of it,” Erich admitted. “The bigger issue is that you need a diploma to sit for the exam after the fact, and I’m talking about students that didn’t finish school. Ideally, I was thinking we could make an exception for that rule and for anyone that passes the exam, in recognition of the fact that they’re clearly adequately educated, concurrently grant them a diploma. Everyone’s too old now, they’re not going to go back and sit in a classroom.” “This is becoming a rather big favor, you know,” Klaus sighed, giving up playing to turn and face Erich. Leaned back against the side of the table, he thought for a moment. “What institution’s seal would we even stamp on our false diplomas?” “Does it matter?” It did matter, Erich knew, of course it mattered, it was one of a dozen bureaucratic things that plagued him by mattering. “There’s always been people that test out and graduate early, what do we do with them?” “They’re current attendees of somewhere, and that’s who gives their diploma, and there’s a process for skipping them ahead grades, and-,” Klaus cut himself off with an annoyed huff. His hands clasped behind his back as he began to pace, long strides from one end of the table to another. “There’s a process. We’re academics, Erich. Our credentials are all we have. You can’t ask one of us to undermine the process that granted them to us like it’s some simple thing. I mean, what if you just started handing out medals because the guy seems like he would’ve earned it given the right opportunity?” “What if it was just an exception for one person?” “Maybe easier. Maybe not. A lot of work to go through for one person when you can just tell them to fuck off and figure it out themselves. Best bet is to get it put through the legislature. Just make us comply instead of asking.” Of its own accord, Erich’s head shook slowly, knowing it was impossible before he could put words to why. “It’s my boss that would handle that,” he explained. “Even if he wanted to, Schleichel isn’t going to waste our political capital pushing through something for the benefit of the few who might have gone onto university. And besides, I doubt he’s in a hurry to create more citizens satisfied with how things turned out for them.” Erich turned his eyes pleadingly in his friend’s direction, wishing, not for the first time, he had Ernst’s talent for silently tugging on heartstrings with little more than a crestfallen cast of his face. “Fine. I’ll tell you what. We both have friends that belong to the riding club. Schmemann is a member there too. We’ll go by a few times, have a chance run-in, then I’ll introduce you.” Klaus gave a humored frown before continuing. “We’re both probably embarrassingly out of practice anyway.” Erich’s hand reached for the back of his neck so his head could roll backwards along it and relieve the building tension. This project of his had already been plagued with delays from awkward calls to near-strangers for favors, starting with the first. For half a year, or close to, the evenings he’d decided he was going to call old Colonel von Ulenberg he’d told himself he’d have a drink or two in advance to improve his mood before figuring out what to say to the least favorite former superior, whom he hadn’t spoken to in a decade, the one person he’d known could give him a crucial detail - the name of a man with some power to dictate whether the whole endeavor succeeded or failed. One or two drinks had become three or four, and then his tongue had felt too loose, so it would have to wait for another night. And another night. And another. And another, until finally he’d had the bright idea to do it at work, both sober and in the right place for unpleasant conversations. “I can’t be seen at the riding club,” he bemoaned, tipping his head back again, this time to finish his drink. “Too conservative. Way too conservative.” Erich gave a short laugh at the irony of the position he found himself in. Unoccupied by his whiskey, his fingers reached out for his cue stick. Klaus’s abandoned turn transformed into his, the score forgotten and reset to zero. Billiards was one thing he could decisively win at, for a change. “I’m surprised you’re willing to be seen at the riding club,” he commented, giving up for the night on getting anything done besides having a bit of fun. “I hear all you academics are closet communists.” “I focus on the history of Germanian nation-building.” Klaus elbowed Erich out of the way with false annoyance to take back his time at the table. “Keeping court with only liberals would be a professional death sentence.” While he watched Klaus strike at the balls, no longer concerned with points but with how spectacularly he could make them split all across the table, Erich put out the remnants of his cigarette over ice. Holding the empty glass until someone came to take it suddenly seemed a great hardship. On a ledge behind the nearest plant it went, to be found by someone who thought they were done cleaning, who would rush the last dish to the back of the kitchen to find the dishwashers had left, who would then put it back, except better disguised this time, for someone else to deal with. Maybe it would be there the next time he checked. “Everything’s a professional death sentence for me,” he laughed, more at his imagination than the reality he waded through daily. “Too conservative and someone’ll say I can’t be trusted not to start another war, too liberal and I can’t be trusted to fight on our side if it comes, too moderate and I can’t be trusted to lead and make decisions one way or another.” “Oops,” Klaus interjected, a sheepish smile flashed in Erich’s direction while the other man went to retrieve a ball that had hopped away after an enthusiastic strike. When Klaus returned from under their neighbor’s table, he cocked his head in question. “Your political darling of a boss isn’t so shy about dropping in on the riding club every once in a while. That’s what I hear, at least.” A dismissive snort made its way out of Erich’s nose. “Klaus,” he lectured, humor coloring his voice with the absurdity of what he was going to say, the absurdity that to some degree or other, in spite of efforts to modernize, it still rang true. “Your ancestors are disappointed in you. I know your family name isn’t anything to brag about, but you’ve been properly ennobled for centuries. You aren’t really going to tell your grandfathers you consider the son of some merchant family that bought their title a single generation ago a part of the same class?” Klaus threw him an unwilling smile, then his cue stick cut across the table. Erich barely avoided the poke, and the subsequent minutes of rubbing chalk off his jacket. “Like it or not, Schleichel’s family were middle class until his grandfather had a stroke of luck,” Erich sighed, seriousness returning. “He’s from fucking Bielfeld. I’m a dispossessed landowner from the east.” “You sold that property, let’s not exaggerate-,” “It’s not me exaggerating that’s the problem. You know what it looks like.” “Alright, alright.” Klaus laid his cue stick on the table, raised his hands in defeat. “Give me a few months, and I’ll talk to Schmemann for you. Get him all buttered up.” “Or you could just do it tomorrow.” “Or you could just come to the riding club and if the revanchism accusations get too much, I’ll publish an unauthorized biography of you claiming it’s actually you who’s the closet communist, because you couldn’t marry that first girl you liked and ever since have wanted to abolish both national and class identities.” This time, it was Erich’s cue stick that aimed across the table. His strike landed, lightly glancing off Klaus’s coat, just under the breast pocket, a smudge of white dust for evidence. In a flurry of movement, Klaus’s hands went to his front to brush off the memory of his inferior dodging abilities, a miffed “Hey!” coming once he’d had time to look down and inspect the damage. “The last time I talked to Schmemann wasn’t long before I made a bit of a name for myself,” Klaus explained, making his problem worse by licking a thumb to rub at the stain, not realizing the dry handkerchief a few centimeters from it was the better answer. “If I only talk to him again now that I want a favor, it’ll come off like I let some minor fame go to my head. It isn’t, I just - well, it’s just life, you never keep up with everyone you mean to, but…” Without moving his head, Klaus’s eyes traveled up from his almost-literal navel-gazing, up and up again until they met Erich’s, a sly grin tugging at his lips. “You know what it looks like,” he said, throwing Erich’s words back at him. “Fine,” Erich sighed. Tired of watching his friend labor fruitlessly, like he’d never so much as seen a piece of dirty laundry before, he pulled his own handkerchief out, white and a bit out of fashion, EML embroidered in a corner. A graduation present from some relative or another, he thought. Maybe more than a bit out of fashion. He threw it at Klaus. It struck in the same spot he’d hit earlier. Luck, but he’d jot it down to skill. The game didn’t resume - they both knew who would win, there was little question about the outcome for most people pitted against Erich, there might be one person in the whole room who could give him a run for his money. Instead, they found their way to barstools, Klaus’s legs so long they nearly touched the floor when he sat. The man to their right eyed them briefly to see if they’d come to sit next to him for a reason besides an open seat. Erich recognized the face, couldn’t put a name to it to save his life though, and didn’t have to. The man turned away disinterestedly soon enough. His conversation with Klaus became rapidly less productive. They ribbed each other for their taste in wine, always, Erich’s claimed to be too fruit-heavy and light to suit him, not a good strong Bordèu, which Klaus didn’t drink either because he only ever ordered something affectedly unique, which might make him the right person to ask about where one set about acquiring Malbec without having to go to fifteen hundred kilometers west to Caors for it. Talk moved onto half-serious complaints before moving on to imagined sins that other people, the world at large, or Fate was committing against them. Eventually, they were caught up and out of news, and wound gently around from the past few months to the future. “So,” Klaus inquired. “Marian coming with you for Christmas again? If so I’m telling my wife the kids’ll be fine with her sister and we’re going out with you two. Or Elise, maybe?” “No.” Erich frowned into his glass of Burgundian red, feeling the need to explain further. He wasn’t hiding her, he wasn’t, Klaus had met her no less than three times. “I already told this guy Wechter he could come meet the crowd. And it’s not like she celebrates it.” “Uh huh,” Klaus nodded, spinning a bit in his chair so he faced inwards. He rested an elbow down onto the deep red mahogany of the bar and leaned nonchalantly onto it. “So that’s an excuse.” Just loud enough to hear over the music, half throb, half whoosh, the low, steady thrum of his heartbeat sounded in his ears, a somber drum beating out a marching tempo towards the battle Klaus was forcing on him. “It’s - she-,” he stopped, took a breath, took a drink, tried again. “I don’t think she’s very comfortable with it. This kind of place reminds her who she is, who she isn’t. Not that anyone’s rude to her, only-,” He looked around, again, at the room, from the sheen of the highly-polished silver rimming cut-crystal ashtrays as heavy as paperweights to pairs and groups formed from people who, like he and Klaus, had known each other for decades, half a century in some cases, to the speaker that over his pulse and the conversations he could hear had switched to playing Françoise cabaret music, a woman singing in her deep-yet-nasally voice words that he and everyone raised like him understood naturally and easily as a second tongue, whether by nanny or tutor or wealthy grand-mère who married across the border where they still gave titles, a language in which Elise recognized little more than what she needed - help, please, where are my legs, which, in retrospect, he should not have laughed at when she recited her vocabulary. “This isn’t her world,” he sighed, slumping forward in his chair. “Far from it. Everything can be fine, just us and then we’re somewhere like this and I can see her wondering if until the end of time she’s going to be worrying about whether she’s going to do something wrong and embarrass me, mess things up for me, and I-,” He stopped himself again before his preoccupations took the conversation into too fine of detail. Another cigarette, and another glass of wine, would perk up his mood. He ordered one and took out the other. “I can’t lie to her, Klaus. I can’t look her in the eye and tell her there isn’t some truth in it. She’s not stupid. I wish she’d believe me but she won’t, so trying to lie will only get me in more trouble.” He puffed a few times on his cigarette, resigned to the challenge of it. “I’m sure she’ll like being asked to come out for Christmas, in her own way. But only asked. She won’t want to come, so won’t want me to have asked, because now she has to be the rude one and decline, or she has to suffer through it, so either way she’s going to be annoyed. Annoyed she had to come, or annoyed because she thinks I’m annoyed she won’t come, even if I tell her I’m not she’ll think it, so it’s easier on both of us if I tell her I already made promises to someone else and she knows that’s our excuse.” “So, what, you guys just never going to go out in public together, or…?” “No, I mean, actually I think it’ll be easier once we’re married. If we got married. After that, you know you can’t avoid the issue and it makes it easier to suck it up when you need to.” “Just do it then,” Klaus laughed. “I’d be spectacularly bad at my job if that’s how I approached things,” Erich laughed back, feeling some of the tension drain away now that he’d gotten out what was on his mind. “I know things can’t be perfect, this isn’t my first go at it, I’m only trying to be realistic about making sure I have some semblance of a plan for when our worlds don’t fit together so harmoniously. Our religions are different. She’s not going to value my job at the expense of her own as much as might be ideal. She’s not going to want to go out to as many charity auctions, or whatever, as she should. I’ve never had to think about how important this stuff is to me or not and get a sense of what I’ll sacrifice without a second thought, where and why a tactical retreat might be called for, where I’m going to stand my ground. It’s only fair to both of us for me to go in with my eyes open.” Klaus reached over and thumped him twice on the shoulder, the second ending with a grasp and a wink. “Despite what you said at the time, obviously you weren’t very serious about Franzciska if you never thought about all this before.” “I was fifteen,” Erich protested, batting Klaus’s hand away. “What the fuck kind of fifteen-year-old have you ever met that thinks about stuff like that?” He hummed out a sigh, no longer so resigned to having to solve problems as he was contented by the idea that once he solved a few last things for himself, there would be nothing left to tiptoe around. “You can’t always care about everything other people think,” he said, gesticulating vaguely at the room filled with many minds, all of which surely contained some opinions he’d rather not know. “But you have to care about some things, or else you can’t - you just-,” “Greet people by handing them a dead beetle?” A wheeze of laughter whooshed out loud enough to turn a few heads at the memory Klaus had filled in the end of the sentence with. Absolute mortification had fixed the scene clear as day in Erich’s mind - Klaus, back when he looked more bookish and less self-confident than he did now, a tangle of limbs with no bulk behind him, cuffs a few centimeters too short on his wrists and ankles as the tailor struggled to keep up; himself, life humming along perfectly on track and therefore over-filled with self-confidence, looking less bookish than he did now, on account of his lack of glasses; the beautiful afternoon, the back garden shown off in its best light, blooms on trees and flowers opened to the sun and wafting gentle perfume in the air to leave Klaus, his newest friend, suitably impressed upon his first visit in that summer between his last two years of cadet school, when he’d begged his parents to let him stay in Berun for most of it instead of shipping him back home, which they’d happily agreed to because by then they’d known about Francziska and wanted no more of it. And then there was Werner. Erich’s second cousin, Aunt Irma’s only child, who’d lived at the house too. He took after his mother, striking without being attractive, everything from ungainly broad shoulders to black fuzzy caterpillars in place of eyebrows to projecting chin to deep baritone voice still cracking into a child’s squeak when nervous commanding attention. Werner had commanded Klaus’s attention and promptly used the opportunity to make sure his cousin didn’t skip an overview of the garden’s insect population on his tour, handing over a particularly unique beetle for Klaus to inspect himself. “Werner, Werner, Werner,” Klaus laughed. “You know, I’ve always felt I owed an incalculable debt to Werner.” “How’s that?” “You remember how I was. A little too eager to share what I knew to anyone who’d listen.” “I still think you know more of my family history than I do,” Erich smiled. “Then along comes Werner, and he’s obviously very passionate about this beetle and he really knew his stuff about it, and I’ve barely got his name and now I know more about this beetle than I do about him, and it’s not like I dislike bugs particularly, I wasn’t grossed out or anything. Half of me was ready to abandon you and go along with Werner because he was into it that I was getting excited like, hey, maybe this will be cool to learn about.” Klaus paused to light a cigarette himself, taking a long breath in and puffing it out in a stream above him. “Then the other half of me has no idea what to make of Werner and is going ‘Kla-aus, this is what you do to people. This is what it feels like from the other side. People probably think you’re a little touched like this guy-’” “He’s not-,” “I know,” Klaus conceded. “You’ve told me a hundred times. I just prefer to think he was born that way.” Erich knew Klaus knew. He also knew, despite their differences, life-long fondness would keep him jumping unnecessarily to Werner’s defense. They were the same age. As boys they’d been close, both a little shy, both average by most measures, with the average interests and average hobbies and average mix of good and bad behavior of any elementary-aged boy. Werner’s father had died when they were eleven, maybe twelve. Even that, he’d had an average reaction to. Aunt Irma hadn’t. She couldn’t bear to be separated from the last piece of her late husband, had withdrawn Werner to be homeschooled, barely let him out of her sight, wouldn’t let him stay out with friends as he got older. Little by little and bit by bit, Werner had lost his rhythm in the normal sway of things and gotten out of step with the rest of them. “It’s a bit scary,” Erich agreed. “You think you’ve learned how to behave and can’t forget it, and turns out it only feels that way because most of us get daily reminders.” “Well, maybe it was his age at the time. He was sort of at the beginning of learning to be an adult.” “Maybe.” “Anyway, how is Werner these days?” “Oh, good. Very good. I don’t see him as much as I’d like to. He and his wife travel a lot.” Chaos erupted next to him. A mist of wine missed him by a hair, Klaus managing to turn enough to sputter over the bar. He turned swiftly back, clapped both hands down on Erich’s shoulders and used them to support himself through the ensuing choking fit. Gasping, eyes watering and face blotchy from his ordeal, his head came up. “Werner. Werner got married? What the - when?” “Two - no, three years ago. I never told you?” “How the hell didn’t you tell me? Werner’s married?” “I know, I know, but trust Werner to pick the weirdest time. The war had just ended, my parents had just died, Otto and I were trying to sell the estate, he was trying to move, I was trying to buy him out of the place here, I mean, I know I attended the wedding but in all honestly I have no memory of it. Then after enough time went by I assumed I’d told you and couldn’t remember that either.” Erich’s laughter faded to tell Klaus a secret he’d so far kept from everyone. “There’s a couple things I can’t remember from that year. I didn’t want to admit I couldn’t until I was sure it was temporary, or I knew it wasn’t and I had to see a doctor. I think it must run in the family. I kind of remember my father mentioning the same happened to my mother when they - umm - after they lost my sister. Stress-induced, I guess.” Klaus’s hands finally lifted off him, one giving a pat before it left. “If stress is what you want to call it,” he said, suddenly sober. “I doubt it’s just you all though. Too much weighing on your mind, too little sleep, makes sense your brain doesn’t run like it should. It could probably happen to anyone. Might have been better if you’d gotten it out then. Might still be better for you now.” The taps Erich made with his cigarette over the ashtray were deliberately slow, measured out to distract himself while he quelled any impulsivity in his response, either to do exactly as Klaus suggested or be offended he suggested it. “I didn’t think I took any of it worse than anyone else would have,” he argued. “My parents dying. Otto moving. The war ending. Badly. And I still don’t think of any piece of it as being particularly harder than you expect, for the record.” “Talk to Otto, then.” “About what?.” “Any of it. All of it. I don’t know. Or Marian.” Erich shook his head quickly. “Are you joking? She might run away if I tried. Otto would be much nicer about it. Ernst - my adjutant, you know - he’s probably best if you need a moment to overreact.” Klaus’s eyebrows migrated skeptically up his scalp. “A bit unusual for your profession.” “No, he’s - he’s very calm, actually, very level-headed, doesn’t really let much get to him. All the bodies, all the war, it affected him some, same as all of us, but when I could tell he was getting a bit mopey, he could tell he was too, and more than anyone I know he could tell himself to think about something happy and move on by sheer willpower.” Erich smiled at the memory, he couldn’t prevent it, Ernst bursting into his office, one hand over his eyes, a piece of paper wobbling in the other shaky fist, thinking he had privacy and horrified to see Erich there when he’d made plans for lunch outside the office, cancelled at the last minute without Ernst’s knowledge. He’d gasped out to ask whether he could stay just a second before he had to go back out in public. Thinking it must have been nigh-catastrophic to garner such a reaction, Erich had offered Ernst a seat. “This one time, he comes in my office, sniffling, clinging on this piece of paper. I’m thinking it can’t be a death in the family. It’s not 1830, you don’t have to wait for the post to learn about it. Then I think, knowing him specifically, some woman out there is pregnant and she’s pressing some kind of legal claim about it, and that explains why it’s in writing and not over the phone or in person.” Erich relished the thought with a laugh, somewhat shocked that to this day, Ernst hadn’t come running to him for an emergency raise. “Anyway, through his kind of garbling, he tells me some other guy in the office’s daughter wrote this story about her dog and he passes this paper over to me. Now, for a high schooler, it was perfectly good writing. Of course, the dog dies, it’s supposed to be sad, but it’s so goddamn sappy you kind of want to laugh instead. Except Ernst, who can’t get ahold of himself and takes the paper back when I’m done and not crying over it to read it again and make sure it was as sad as he thought, which starts him all over again, so I have to sit there pretending I don’t want to laugh, so the point is, he owes me.” The rest of the story - the best part of all - Erich left out. The part where this happened not only over lunch but at the end of the hour. The part where Ernst’s time in his office then coincided with Tanya’s. The part where flat and dry, as her humor usually was, unless she didn’t realize it was funny, which was possible, she looked briefly at Ernst, acknowledged him with an ahh, Sauer, some girl told you she’s keeping it? then proceeded directly with the meeting as though he was invisible and not audibly in emotional distress in the corner of the room. Erich had had to cover his mouth with a hand and surreptitiously bite on a knuckle to keep Ernst from hearing the laughter that had then threatened to spill out unrestrained. Thankfully, Tanya giving voice to the rude thought on both their minds had offended Ernst enough to alter his emotional state. Maybe Erich should have laughed from the beginning. “Seriously, though,” Klaus said, knocking Erich with an elbow and out of his thoughts. “Otto always struck me as - not a good role model, maybe, but a good sibling. And talkative. He probably has things he’s waiting on you to bring up so he can go off about them.” “I know,” Erich admitted, circling his wine glass with his hand so he could watch its contents slosh around, wishing it were liquor so there was no stem and he could twirl the whole tumbler around to watch the light refract through the patterns etched into it. All in all, Otto was as good a brother as Klaus said. For all the legitimate complaints he made about his brother’s constant jokes that toed all kinds of lines, there were the times he did it because Otto knew that in the hot lash of anger he’d receive back, he’d hear all the reasons he wasn’t allowed to find it funny and suddenly, confessions Erich hadn’t known if he wanted to make or didn’t know how to slipped their way out of his mouth and into the world. “Actually, it’s when Otto’s serious when he comes to talk I hate it the most,” he told Klaus. “I’m supposed to be the serious one, so if he comes to take my place at it I know something’s really wrong. It’s only happened a couple times, so I’ll assume since there’s nothing recent none of us need to be too worried about me.” Klaus accepted with a wave at the bartender for a shot, offering one to Erich. He declined, Klaus downed his, and with a shake of his head and a shudder, he was back to smiling. “So. Werner has a wife.” “Yes. Elisabeth. Lisa. And honestly, I say I don’t see Werner as much as I’d like, but really, I mostly go over to see her nowadays.” With great urgency, Klaus waved the bartender back for a second pour. “Werner...has a hot wife?” he asked in disbelief when he was through swallowing. “How’d he even meet her to marry her right after the war? Bring her back from the front? Are we positive she’s a woman?” “Werner didn’t get called up.” “What was his excuse?” “I don’t know,” Erich laughed. “Maybe as a show of friendship he brought a dead beetle to give to the guy in charge of mustering him in and he didn’t know what the hell it was supposed to mean and decided giving Werner a firearm was more likely to result in a mass murder of his own company than anything else so sent him back.” “Okay, okay,” Klaus cut in, slapping his knee in laughter. “So he was the only guy around for desperate hot women to find? How is that fair? I think this needs to be added as a war crime. I’m sorry to be mean, just...I can’t…” “No, no,” Erich contradicted. “Lisa isn’t much to look at, and I doubt she ever was. She’s also a good ten years older. I know she’s at least fifty.” Klaus’s eyes wandered over to the bartender a third time. “You will lose a drinking contest against shocking facts about Werner’s wife. Trust me.” Bright blue eyes floated back to Erich. “She’s - uncompromising is the only word for it, literally, she does precisely what she wants, how she wants. She doesn’t eat meat. Or anything the color green. They go to Ostria every other month because it’s the only place she’ll get this brand of pretzels from. Her father was an investigator for the police and she was utterly confident she could follow him and be the first woman in the job, except she refuses to exercise besides her daily two kilometer walk, or to get out of bed before eleven in the morning.” More details spilled out, all of them he could remember, the strange places she’d traveled, the variegated series of odd jobs she’d held down over the years, each more outlandish than the last, the car she drove - drove, a fifty-year-old woman - better suited to the tastes of a wasteful young son of parents both spectacularly wealthy and spectacularly absent. “Hates children,” he finished. “And I don’t mean doesn’t want children. I mean only interacts with people younger than about fourteen under extreme duress. She’s fucking fascinating, and smarter than both of us. I’d love Marian to meet her, except I’m not sure she’s forgiven Werner.” “What, for mooning over her all those years ago?” “No, I’m sure she liked that. No, for the thinking she might like him back. She’s a countess and he’s the lesser branch of the lesser branch of untitled nobility. And it’s not like he had a lot else going for him either. The audacity she found quite insulting.” “Well, he’s married now,” Klaus reasoned. “He’s clearly moved on.” “Yeah, to someone more interesting than Marian is,” Erich chuckled. “A still less forgivable offense. Anyway, maybe Werner and Lisa know a secret the rest of us don’t. Judge all you like, they couldn’t be happier, and - oh.” Tap, tap, tap, his cigarette went against his fingers, this time in excitement. “I forgot to tell you - when Lisa travels, she takes this doll with her everywhere, which alright, everyone’s entitled to something a bit off. But you know who her sister’s married to?” Klaus shook his head, leaned in. “Robert Engelhorn.” “From the chemicals company? That’s a hell of a brother-in-law.” Erich nodded and waited for Klaus to digest that tidbit before the rest. “Now, from what I know, one sister is just as strange as the other, not enough good looks between them for one person, and the older sister travels with an entire suitcase of dolls. An entire suitcase.” “So, you’re telling me, what has to be one of the richest men in the country, could marry just about any woman he wanted, picked that one?” Klaus paused and a knowing smile shot in Erich’s direction. “What skeletons does that guy have in his closet?” “That’s all I’m saying,” Erich snickered, tossing his hands out to the side. “Do you need to ask Marian to investigate that? Does she need my help?” “What? No.” “No, I’m serious. Big chemical manufacturer, guy’s obviously not quite right in the head, that’s like, a national security concern. And besides, whatever turns up, I’m sure the Army’d love being able to blackmail him. It’s practically a civic duty.” “Don’t give me more extracurricular work just because you’re curious,” Erich muttered. “I’ve got enough.” “I’m doing the school project for you.” Over the next few minutes, Erich detailed his more recent venture. This one hadn’t been so difficult to get underway, it had only been a few months and by the turn of the new year he expected it would be up and running. It so perfectly aligned every professional priority he’d made for himself all he regretted was not thinking of it sooner. It was easy, all too easy, to look at charts and graphs and tables and projections and reduce lives down to numbers. Few things had drilled the real cost into him like little Peter Bratfisch, sitting on his shoulders and too young to even understand his father’s first name hadn’t been Dad or where Russland was, let alone why Dad wasn’t coming back from there. The countless orphans they’d made, and the innocent blows they delivered without realizing it, were a better reality check for most officers insulated in offices than the worst reports, where a name inked in black on white paper was as close to human life as they got. On the flip side, as of right now all the extra parentless children were heading for an electoral bloc twenty years from now that would vote to make more parentless children. They’d suffer hardship in childhood and struggle to find a place in the world in adulthood, and they’d blame the François Army, the Rus Army, the Americans, the Albish, the Legadonians, one person the Dacians, never the Imperial Army. That was the reality they’d know, opposed to the reality he knew, that it was everyone’s fault and no one’s. Giving orphans holed up in institutions, many closer to jails than nurseries, exposure to the rest of the world wouldn’t only help them find their place easier when it came time to leave and seek out work and friends and family, it would expose them to the truth. Plenty of veterans would find children an easy audience for what none of them were supposed to talk about; plenty of children would hear the real account of what it meant to fight alone against the world. What made for a heroic epic, in finer detail, also made for a harrowing everyday life. And, he supposed, it was a good deed, which he should do more of without ulterior motives, because even when the ulterior motives were good themselves, they were philosophically better yet realistically worse than being nice for niceness’ sake. Since he wasn’t being nice for niceness’ sake, he was in no hurry to claim credit for it. The idea was sound; given the Army’s history with child soldiers, it was the motives that were suspect if the program began internally. Risking getting more committed than he’d like to the minute concerns of the neighborhood association, Erich had attended one meeting and singled out one woman - the one who wanted to be on the board of the charity committee, but wasn’t friends with the president so was left with both resentment and unused ambition to make a difference the only way allowed to her. That had been how he’d found Mrs. Margarete Škoda, wife of a major paper manufacturer, and given her the idea to run with, so the pressure for his program came from someone suitably unrelated to him, who no one could accuse of being a spokesperson for anyone other than the powerless and voiceless orphan population. “Oh,” Klaus sighed. “Oh no.” Erich’s mind raced to find what Klaus saw that he’d forgotten. Every i had been dotted, every t crossed, no potential hiccup left undiscovered. “You are having a midlife crisis,” Klaus groaned. “What? What are you-,” “The students, the orphans, I know you’re worried you’re not going to have kids of your own at the rate you’re going, but you’re not there yet. I mean, I get it, Werner got married first, but seriously, you still have hope.” “I - no - that’s-,” “Look, if things aren’t sorted with Elise soon, I know like, three women.” “Mm, yeah,” he snapped back. “Such an accomplishment to be acquainted with one’s wife and two daughters. If that’s how we’re counting it, I think I know like, eight and a half women.” “You know, it’s kind of rude to only count Marian as half.” “I mostly consider it a technicality,” he said, smiling around the sip of wine he’d taken after speaking, letting it sit in his mouth and permeate his senses with the rounded, silky highs of almond and liquorice until enough of his humor has passed to gulp it down and let the feel of nutmeg and blackcurrant warm the back of his throat. “Anyway, I meant three women that might be interested,” Klaus coughed. “But only one at a time. Unlike me, you can’t juggle all of them simultaneously yet.” “Mm, mhmm,” Erich nodded. “Yeah, I bet. Must be hard to keep your commitments straight between your wife, the girl you dreamt up, and the one you look at in the magazine at work who doesn’t quite love you back the way you want.” “Try my wife, my young and very attractive secretary, and - ahh - well - you wouldn’t know her. But she’s very good-looking.” Klaus puffed his chest up in a show of bravado. “I’d like to see you beat that.” As soon as Erich opened his mouth, Klaus interjected. “Well, you were back and forth between fronts for a while, so no distributed harem of camp girls you accumulated or whatever. It has to be an accomplishment.” Intoxicated laughter sent him sinking into his elbows that rested on the bar, head bowed and chest shaking. “Then you can’t count your wife as an accomplishment.” One of Klaus’s fists knocked him at the base of the skull. “I had five children in quick succession,” he sighed. “You’d think that was the worst part of it, except when they’re babies they can’t come find you. Now they can. You don’t know anything about accomplishment.” “Remind me again why you don’t have a nanny?” “All those communist academics gave me weird ideas about raising children,” Klaus muttered. “We turned out fine,” Erich sniffed, humor vibrating at his voice still. “Anyway, I can’t speak for Ms. I-wouldn’t-know-her, but you’re going to have to take your secretary off the list.” Klaus raised an impertinent eyebrow. “Why’s that?” “You’ve never so much as seen her shoulder. You aren’t sleeping with her.” “How do you know? Maybe I am.” “Because,” Erich yawned, his head’s position resting between his arms reminding him how late the hour was. “Because I wouldn’t tell you if our positions were reversed. It’s not an accomplishment when you can fire them for it. And that’s what people will think if you tell them. So you only say it if it’s not true.” To his impeccable logic, he raised a toast with the vestigial sip left in his glass, raising his head off the bar to drink it. There was a reason he’d stopped peeking in on which of the typists was still around when he left for the day once he’d passed the rank of major and people started caring about his opinion. He’d never know if the answer was more yes, please or yes, sir. “Yeah, well,” Klaus deflected, hesitating a moment before accepting his defeat. “We should both get home. And if things don’t work out with Elise, don’t come bragging about some random girl a week later.” He kicked Klaus under the hidden area shadowed by the bar counter. He’d said it twice now: if things don’t work out with Elise. It wasn’t nice. “I won’t,” he hummed out, alcohol pulling a lazy smile onto his lips. Maybe he’d see what she was up to tonight. 
 
 November 21, 1931Berun-Charité Hospital
 
Outside of a certain scenario she never got the chance to put herself in during her original stint at life, Tanya only liked two-to-one advantages when she was a member of the former class. For that reason, she’d made her fair share of subtle excuses over the past year as to why Visha couldn’t meet her predecessor in the role of close female companion. Like Visha, Erna, who was walking beside her and struggling to keep up with her pace - clearly she wasn’t getting enough exercise at the nunnery - also enjoyed treating her younger friend like the hapless girl Tanya appeared to be on the outside when it came to anything that wasn’t job or school related. Visha and Erna were sure to get along famously over their similar approach to managing Tanya’s personal affairs. Mostly, Tanya had avoided a joint session of overprotective congress because she’d imagined they’d agree on what bill to pass through the legislature at highest priority. Despite being of nominally different sects of the Christian faith, Tanya had operated under the belief that both women would consider it an improvement if she began making regular attendance at the other’s church, with a friendly contest ensuing over whether she was going to stick with the religion that had raised her or try her potential Rus ancestry’s traditions on for size. More recently, Tanya had been apprised of the fact that Erna used religion for approximately the same purposes she did. Her goals on getting ahead differed so much she could hardly term Erna’s approach career-minded, but all the same, her commitment was borne out of convenience rather than conviction. That entrenched Tanya firmly in Erna’s camp and gave them the advantage over Visha’s earnest desire to believe in transcendental goodness and justice. If anything, she suspected Erna would gladly lie for her and claim she was attending services, as long as Tanya agreed to weekly Saturday evening “mass” with her that let Erna come downtown to try out a new bar together under the guise of a Christ-like compassion for seeking out lapsed believers in the darkest corners. Happily, Visha’s other close friend aided and abetted Tanya in sidelining mentions of piety whenever the topic arose. Elya kept vigil on a few culturally important events. Otherwise, her opinion was that it would be better for her if God didn’t exist to keep an eye on her. At most, Tanya nodded along with understanding to Elya’s sentiment without vocally supporting it. Avowed atheism would give her no better than a neutral assessment. Lacking Elya’s carefree approach to offending potential employers, it didn’t serve her to be any worse than reasonably questioning in the wake of the senseless death, destruction, and loss she’d seen. Though, if anyone cared to ask, they’d see Tanya had spent plenty of hours in the confessional booth after the war begging absolution for whatever she’d done that people disapproved of. She was behind on more Hail Marys than she could count. Now that her concerns of being the conversion project of two women with little better to do had been alleviated, she was in a position to satisfy the desires of both Visha and Erna, who’d each professed a curiosity over the other. The dark, nearly black doors of Charité Hospital were something of an allegory for the person Tanya was holding them open for. Better on the inside than the robe would imply. Like usual, the nursing staff wasn’t well-inclined to her presence. It was hardly Tanya’s fault the visiting hours aligned so poorly with a work schedule she was reduced to bothering them by rousing them to activity on weekend mornings or keeping them late on weeknights. Still, without being a paying customer, her visits were resented for their inconvenience. With the advent of summer and the hopes of leisurely hours, the nurses had fallen further into their entrenched hatreds. The fall, now nearly winter, had done little to ameliorate the situation. One of the women in front of her that she recognized as part of the emergency room’s crew gave Tanya a cold stare for daring to interrupt the gossip session going on at the main desk so she could check in. After the receptionist’s brief glance up at the older woman standing next to her, whose short dark curls bounced with a sharp nod, Tanya was treated to a second glare from the mild-mannered woman adjudicating the front room. Doubtless, she had Visha to blame. It was no secret that mages received care far outside the reach of the average patient. There was no shortage of medical professionals upset by the idea that patients were treated more according to the needs of the state than on the basis of individual merit. Emergency room workers would naturally be the most prone to such bias. With their frosty greeting behind them, she and Erna quietly made their way down one hall and then another until they were in front of Visha’s door. As per usual, she was nominally engaged in a book when they entered, though her focus was more taken with the dead leaves swirling in the autumn breeze out the window than the text sitting in her lap. “Visha,” she called, knocking as she stepped inside. Her gaze pulled away from what she was looking at to drift over to her guests. “You must be Sister Erna,” Visha replied, putting a bit of emphasis on the title. It was to be expected she’d be excited Tanya kept in touch with a nun. “I’ve heard...so many good things about you.” Tanya looked towards Visha out of the corner of her eye. There really was no need to lie for the sake of politeness in this instance. Erna couldn’t possibly be offended that she hadn’t been the primary topic of discussion between Tanya and her subordinates during a war, and the pause in between had made the compliment sound as empty as it was. Clearly, Visha’s social graces had suffered some as a result of her extended hospitality in the Federation. “I could say the same,” Erna replied with an unusually wide smile. Thankfully, she seemed to have missed the gaffe. “From what Tanya tells me, you’re quite the worldly woman.” Tanya winced and fought not to drop her head into her hands. Being a nun, she couldn’t entirely fault Erna for her choice in words. Erna had never left the surroundings of Berun. In a literal sense, Visha was a worldly woman compared to her. Tanya had spoken praises of her adjutant within her yearly letters “home” during the war, impressed with Visha’s linguistic talents. She’d probably mentioned Visha had lived in three countries - she’d spent six months in Parisee immediately after fleeing the Federation - somewhere in there. Nonetheless, Visha was sure not to appreciate the accidental implication that her former boss had made up tales about her nighttime exploits. “You must be thinking about our other friend,” Visha giggled into her hand. Then, her attention shot over to Tanya. “It isn’t nice to talk about Elya like that, you know.” Tanya opened her mouth to explain she’d done nothing of the sort, and the miscommunication was based on differing connotations. By the time she was ready to say something, she was being ignored again. “There’s times you can really tell she was raised under unfortunate circumstances,” Visha sighed, gaze shifting to Tanya briefly. “I think half my job was tweaking the letters I got dictated so we didn’t offend anyone.” The news came as a surprise to Tanya. Due to the trust she’d placed in her adjutant, she’d customarily signed off on whatever Visha had typed after a cursory inspection. She felt more than a bit guilty over the extra work she’d caused a fellow employee. Not that it had been necessary, but that as the superior in the situation, she hadn’t caught it and explained that Army lifers didn’t expect to be minced gently around like they were little princesses being invited to a dance. Erna shook her head sadly to Visha’s revelation. “You should have seen what we were working with to begin. I’m sure you wouldn’t have been able to do much if I hadn’t intervened early on.” Tanya’s head snapped the other direction this time. The accusation was blatantly unfair. Sure, her grasp of preschool-aged etiquette might have been shaky. Regardless, she’d consistently behaved in ways universally recognized as polite. Just because they were unusual in children was no reason to call her uncivilized. “Then you must be glad your work didn’t go to waste after all those times I saved her life,” Visha sighed, nodding sagely to herself while she crossed her arms. “Absolutely,” Erna agreed, finally pulling up a chair to sit down next to the bed. “I wouldn’t want to think all those extra smacks with the ruler when I lied and told the sisters Tanya had only left to come bring me back were for nothing.” Tanya put up a hand in protest. Erna had subjected herself to excess punishment by informed consent. The terms of their agreement to skip prayers together had been more than clear. Tanya checked the clock. Much less time had passed than she’d hoped. She was stuck with this for at least another hour. By now, the two seemed to have forgotten their similarities and were focused on making themselves sound useful at Tanya’s expense. While she could understand the desire to prove what value one added to a relationship when meeting someone new, they didn’t have to do it by casting her as a helpless hanger on. She’d have preferred if they found a different argument. Like religion. “What a kind effort,” Visha snickered. “Although in the end it might have been better not to. The adjustment to Army life must have been hard after she was so used to having someone protecting her.” “Maybe,” Erna shrugged. Tanya sighed with relief. Erna wasn’t quite as obsessed with winning as she’d trained Visha to be, it would seem. “But she’s pretty tough like that.” Erna turned to look at Tanya, and she gave a grudging nod of confirmation back. She wouldn’t want the other woman thinking she’d inadvertently traumatized her younger companion by coming to her defense. With that, the discussion could end in a draw. “Yeah,” Erna hummed, mostly to herself, then looked at her with a smile. “I bet last summer when I almost had to come rescue you at work because you thought you were pregnant was scarier than anything that happened to you during the war.” Tanya could say one thing for certain - Erna’s misleading statement had given Visha more of a shock than any unpleasant development had during the war, at least judging by the dumbfounded, open-mouthed stare she’d turned on her. As a thoroughly modern person herself, Tanya could barely imagine the judgmental thoughts flying through Visha’s propriety-minded head. “That’s not…” Tanya coughed, taking a moment to clear her throat. “It wasn’t even possible that I was. I was never told to expect some irregularity, and it got to my head, that’s all. I was just panicking.” Tanya crossed her arms, leaned back in her chair, and gave a definitive dip of her chin. She’d never bothered to inquire specifically with Visha over how much or little she’d exposed herself to the risk of motherhood. Of course, she’d been more than aware that in the event of a mishap, Visha would have been put out of commission in a way her other subordinates wouldn’t have, to the detriment of her unit’s performance. On account of Visha’s genteel nature, she’d judged the outcome unlikely. On the other hand, singling Visha out for a lecture above and beyond what everyone got about avoiding transmissible diseases had a much greater chance of making everyone feel like she wasn’t one of the group, which would have had its own nasty side effects on cohesiveness and thus unit performance. Owing to either the Army’s attempts at gender-neutral policies or to a shortage of bureaucratic oversight available for personalizing rations shipments, Tanya could attest to the fact that both women and children had been issued the regular allotment of prophylactics. She’d figured it was best left at that. Regardless of Visha’s own experiences, Tanya expected another woman could sympathize with her struggle. Knowing the fear had likely been irrational had done little to suppress it. A surprise phone call to a friend was hardly an unusual response under the circumstances. “Ahh,” Visha groaned weakly, shoulders slumping down as they relaxed. They quickly drew up to cross her arms over her chest in turn. “Of course. It’s too bad I wasn’t here. I’d have made sure you were ready for everything.” In that moment, Tanya could honestly say she regretted ever having trained Visha. Like a good soldier, she’d re-trained her sights on her target as soon as she’d re-established her equilibrium. The target, in this case, being scoring imaginary points in the game she and Erna seemed to be playing, with Tanya as the ball. All of a sudden, she had excellent clarity as to why everyone wanted nuclear weapons so badly. Clearly, they were the only solution when neither party could de-escalate. Erna was already readying her returning volley of fire. “I doubt you’d have gotten further with her than I-,” “I’ve seen both of you pee your pants,” Tanya blurted out, overtop of whatever Erna was going to say. That got their attention, and fast, allowing her to emerge as the reigning superpower of the conversation, both lesser entities turning to beg her not to drop any more bombs. “I was seven!” Erna wailed. “And Sister Martha wouldn’t let me leave prayers even though I told her I had to go. I was still a kid.” “It was my first day in the trenches,” Visha rebutted, wringing her hands on her blanket. “The first guy I saw die. He was above me and his intestines spilled down all over me. That’s...anyone would...” Tanya let them squabble over who was more undeserving of her ignominious pronouncement for another minute, then moved right along to less-objectionable subject matter. “Has Dr. Eichler said when you’ll be done in here?” she asked. “It’s been a year.” “In the spring sometime,” Visha said brightly. “I can walk well enough they don’t think I’ll hurt myself on my own.” “Finally,” Tanya muttered, mind beginning to wander. Her visits had become fixtures in her week. Surely, with the promise of freedom looming, Visha’s schedule would fill up and clash with Tanya’s own. She’d had more than one coworker she valued fade into memory once their work lives no longer overlapped. Knowing in advance it was likely to happen, she might be able to stave off what seemed to be the inevitable write-down to her relationship portfolio. Few as they were, she couldn’t afford to suffer losses easily. “I’ll still be back here a few times a week,” Visha cautioned. “Physical therapy.” “Where do you think you’ll live?” She shrugged. “My aunt and uncle’s, I guess. I’ll help around the house where I can, and that way I won’t have to find work until I’m ready to be a regular employee. Or find someone willing to marry me and put up with it for another year or so while I’m recovering.” Visha giggled into her hand at the idea. “Unless you wanted to...?” “Ahh...I…” Tanya hesitated, taken by surprise and needing a moment to roll through the pros and cons of a communal living arrangement. From the corner of her eye, she caught Erna’s displeased expression. Apparently, her mind was already made up on something that didn’t concern her. Tanya suspected it was because of the way Visha had phrased the question, like she was under consideration for the role of indulgent spouse - a highly unlikely place to find herself in any universe - and not simply as temporary benefactor. Frankly, Tanya had never considered the option of the two living together. In spite of it seeming like a natural segue from the years they’d shared a tent on and off, the truth was, as an adult leading the life of a regular working adult, she’d never cohabited with a fellow, unrelated adult. She’d lived at home through college, and upon accepting her job and sticking around a few months to build up a safety cushion, she’d found her own place. Somehow, living with a roommate when not under duress seemed like a step back into the unfamiliar, the opposite of the direction she wanted to go. “It was a joke,” Visha practically shouted, eyes fixed on her fingers as they gripped her blanket. Tanya figured she must have made a funny sight, getting flustered by a bit of humor whooshing over her head, and Visha was usually polite with trying to disguise her laughter at someone else’s expense. “I was joking. I didn’t really think you’d want to…” Tanya laughed awkwardly in response, unsure of what else to say. In spite of the unserious nature of the proposition, it wasn’t the worst idea in the world. Thinking about it, her lack of foresight about this option was nothing more than a cultural holdover. While she valued privacy, she also valued money, and there was no denying living with someone else would alleviate some of the cost burden. If her roommate bore their share of the cost, that was. Tanya’s right foot began to bounce where it was crossed over her left leg. She undid the posture and forced herself to sit straight to stop the annoying tic. She didn’t know when she’d got in the habit of crossing her legs anyway. In theory, she wasn’t averse to spotting Visha some cash while she took the appropriate steps to becoming eligible for regular employment. Her former adjutant was trustworthy, and being a mage, she’d be immediately in demand once she wasn’t expending mana on healing processes, so there was no chance of joblessness becoming a permanent condition. Leaving the realm of theory, on a practical interpersonal level, Tanya did have to worry the patron-client arrangement would fix the superior-subordinate dynamic permanently in place. The point of cultivating reliable people was so she could eventually rely on them if need be, not to foster dependence and make them wholly reliant on her. If she wanted a baby, she’d make her own. All in all, it was better not to bring it back up for debate. Visha had only been joking, after all. “Ah good,” Erna laughed, jabbing Tanya lightly with her elbow. “This way, you can keep using your oven for storage.” “Oh no,” Visha lamented, lifting her hand to her mouth to conceal a giggle once again. “You aren’t that bad, are you?” Tanya scowled at Erna for mentioning the collection of stovetop-related items she’d found stashed in there when she’d made breakfast that one morning after she’d stayed over, then shrugged in response to Visha’s question. In a kitchen the size of hers, she assumed the average resident crammed their cabinets unpleasantly full. Tanya had taken the sensible option of designating otherwise unused space as the resting place for some bulkier pieces. “I don’t use it,” Tanya said, with a shake of her head. “Not to cook, anyway. I do everything on the stove.” Visha muttered something to herself in Rus under her breath. Nothing Tanya could understand just yet. “How’s it work at convents behind the scenes?” Visha asked, turning to Erna. “I’ve always kind of wondered.” “Repetitive,” she shrugged. “Not in a bad way. We’re mostly all in charge of our own thing. Someone does laundry, some cook, some of us take care of the kids. A lot like any job, I guess. You wouldn’t think it, but we have the same kinds of rivalries everyone else does. I’m not going to pretend I like all the other sisters the exact same.” “And the children? Do you have favorites too?” “You aren’t supposed to,” Erna drawled, rolling her eyes. “It’s hard not to, though. You have to try to treat them all the same no matter what. Still, that comes easier for some than others. Sometimes I think what it would be like to take my two favorites and run away and have my own family with them.” “Aww,” Visha cooed, lips drawing into a soft smile. “That’s so sweet. What are their names?” “Eva and Edgar,” Erna said, scratching at the back of her head with a laugh at herself. “I’m not sure how I’d support a three-year-old and barely one-year-old, anyway. I just like to think about it. They’re already half siblings.” “Some women,” Visha tutted. “Really. Don’t they know better?” “Man, in this case. But it happens the other way too.” Visha frowned, and Tanya could see her mentally puzzling out how that was possible. She’d had the same reaction back when Erna mentioned it before, only Tanya hadn’t cared enough to ask. The younger child’s age meant they’d been a post-war affair, which begged the question of how the first one had qualified to enter an institution meant to take in the unlucky children of deceased soldiers. Presumably, there were some cracks in the system. Her parents hadn’t been married, and Tanya had ended up at St. Mary’s on her mother’s word. That was bureaucracy for you. “We mostly get the kids placed in our care by the government once they’re wards of the state,” Erna explained. “But we get charity on top of the government stipend, so we can take on a few extras. Sometimes women will come to our door begging, and so long as they’ve got something they show us so it sounds reasonable we’re taking an Army kid, we don’t always have to turn them away.” “My mother must have done it,” Tanya confirmed for VIsha. She jerked her chin towards Erna. “Hers too.” “But it sounds like this guy wasn’t even dead,” Visha hummed. “We don’t have time to check every story,” Erna clucked. “Both women had his identification tag to hand over. No difference except he got promoted in between. You don’t get much better proof than that.” “Well, I’m glad they’ve found one responsible parent,” Visha said, smiling warmly at Erna. Erna returned the gesture. “Anyway, besides all that, I get a lot of time to read. One of the kids spilled milk all over a Bible once and ruined it so I cut the middle out and stick other books in. Good ones, now that Tanya’s helped us out.” Tanya grinned happily, pleased at the image she had in her head of Erna taking a sturdy knife to the Holy Word. “Come to think of it,” Erna went on, tapping at her chin, “maybe you started something. I heard a rumor someone from the Army was interested in pairing up soldiers and orphans, sort of like a volunteer parent. Or maybe a volunteer distant relative that comes around once in a while but you like more than your parents.” Visha’s face lit up at the comment. “Yeah!” She nodded enthusiastically. “The Army probably wants to say something like they’re trying to atone for how many orphans they made. And if it gets good press, you can even take credit for it.” With an encouraging smile, Visha turned to look at Tanya. Tanya turned to the clock again. Still too early to call it a day and dismiss Visha’s thought as she said goodbye. She could understand well enough from Visha’s perspective why the other woman saw the potential moment of fame as a positive. Visha couldn’t be completely unaware that opinions on one Tanya Degurechaff were mixed after the war, not with Elya keeping in touch. Linking her name to a charity program for orphans would increase everyone’s opinion or her, whether they’d liked Tanya for her “patriotism” or thought she’d taken it too far. Knowing a possible, and not unlikely, outcome to the next decade of history, Tanya’s imagination was in a different place. She could see the headlines already: Tanya Degurechaff, inspiration behind the Hilter Youth Program. Taken together with her existing reputation in some circles, it painted an easy picture of her life ending with a hangman’s noose, no matter how clean she kept her record in any subsequent war. Tanya’s left thumbnail found its way between her lips. Another annoying habit she’d picked up in this life she was trying to kick. For now, she was happy to admit it was possible, even probable that whoever was behind this program had good intentions. The trouble was, they didn’t know what she did. Innocently, so ironically innocently, they might be setting up both precedent and structure for an idealistic cadre of future soldiers. The idea and organization would already be in place; all an unfriendly dictator had to do was tweak it here and there. Tanya’s highest priority was to eliminate any connection between her name and this idea. Luckily, that largely revolved around silencing Erna and Visha. The military, or specific people in it, should want to take credit for it without mentioning her. That was what was within their best interests. In this case, that lined up perfectly with her own. Her main issue at the present was Visha. As someone Tanya had trusted to understand the way she operated and learn to emulate it, she’d encouraged her adjutant one too many times not to be so polite that she gave away accolades that were rightfully due to her. It was hard to explain a sudden change of heart when Tanya hadn’t demonstrably changed much as a person. All that was really different between then and now was how she looked on the outside. There wasn’t any helping it. That was going to have to be her excuse. “Don’t say anything about that, please.” Tanya put on her most bashful smile and waved her hands in front of her face. “I wouldn’t want it getting out.” “But Tanya…” came a chorus of two. “I know, just, umm…” she looked down at her feet and scratched behind an ear. “These days, I don’t want my picture in the paper. What if I have a breakout the day they come to shoot it?” She intentionally pointed to the lone red spot on her face intent on reminding her she was a teenager, right where her jaw veered upwards towards her ear. According to a confidential source known as Elya, her hair was to blame for those. Understandably, Visha and Erna were both taken aback by her sudden declaration of low self-esteem on the appearance front. It directly contradicted some things she’d said in other conversations. Visha was the first to recover. “If you’re worried about that, I’m sure between Elya and I we could teach you how to do your makeup right.” “...yes,” Tanya cringed, coughing into a hand. She’d set herself up for that suggestion. In the end, it was knowledge she’d likely need at some point. Nevertheless, she couldn’t have Visha thinking that was the solution to everything. “I guess I’d be needing your advice soon anyway. But besides that, I don’t want people to think of me as just a young lady, so if they see me all dolled up in the news again…” Tanya mimed, not entirely falsely, a heavy sigh. “...the only way I can succeed is if the people I need to see me as an adult actually do. A static photograph might just remind-,” “Mm, yeah,” Visha interrupted. “You do seem older in person. No offense.” “Exactly,” Tanya agreed, happy to have her buy-in. “Plus, I wouldn’t want to be presumptuous. It can make a bad impression if you grab the spotlight to shine on yourself too often, and I’d rather be able to do it when it counts more. That’s especially true if you’re thinking about how people are going to assess you for things outside a role in the military.” Tanya trusted there was no real harm in mentioning she didn’t consider herself exclusively bound for the Army. Were she pressed, she could simply claim to be giving Visha career advice. What she didn’t trust was for either of her companions to have a wide enough perspective to understand why Tanya would care about offending some random guy in the Army by stealing the show from him. Neither Visha nor Erna had ever known more than one job. They therefore had no cause to understand why an officer in a war could be excused for trying to literally save their own skin by whatever means possible, while a civilian eager to stab someone in the back to claim inconsequential glory on a volunteer project was going to earn a reputation that would haunt them. “Well, I’ll make sure we show you how to look older with makeup either way,” Visha laughed. “It’ll be a funny experiment.” “Perfect,” Tanya nodded. Despite not having any desire to learn the art of face-painting, with this, she could kill two birds with one stone. “I’ll get you a make-up kit and let you experiment on me for Christmas.” “Nice try,” Visha huffed, blowing a hair out of her face. “I think you mean as my present to you I’ll buy what you need and show you how to use it.” “But I don’t really want-,” “You want everyone to think of you like an adult. In that case, you should be fine getting something you need but don’t want.” Visha crossed her arms and pointedly jerked her head away to look out the window. Were it not for the twitching lips alerting Tanya she was trying not to smile, she might have believed Visha was put out with her. She’d already missed the cue for one of Visha’s jokes. She didn’t want to make a fool of herself a second time. Tanya was perfectly capable of responding in kind. “Maybe I’ll just submit materials and your time as an expense report at work,” she ribbed, faking a nonchalant yawn. Curiosity overpowered Visha’s act, and she turned enough for Tanya to see she was raising an eyebrow. “I’ll tell my boss it was to set his mind at ease,” she deadpanned. Now, Visha turned to face her fully. “Is he still that hung up over it?” “Not quite like he used to be,” Tanya shrugged. “But some, yeah.” “Hey,” Erna cut in. “Don’t leave me out.” “Colonel von Lehrgen used to-,” “General,” Tanya corrected for what had to be the fifth time. “I know, I know,” Visha said. “Why do you care so much?” “It could make me look bad,” Tanya explained patiently. “If you say it to him, he’ll know I’ve been letting you get away with it, and it might come across like I’m not showing proper respect.” “Tanya,” Visha said, leaning forward to grab her by the shoulders before she had time to back away, and then give them a little shake. “Literally nobody would think that about you. Anyway, I don’t think he’d care that much.” Tanya’s natural inclination was to object. Early on in her career, she’d been witness to another coworker learning the hard way that people promoted the quickest could be the most sensitive to the slightest implication they hadn’t earned it. However, Visha had a point, and in any case, she’d be respecting Lehrgen’s wishes not to define him by his job title. Plus, she knew there was another culprit she could blame. “True,” Tanya conceded with a frown, unconsciously puffing her cheeks out childishly at having to admit she was wrong. “Elya calls him by his first name.” “Exactly,” Visha said with finality, before releasing her hold on Tanya’s shoulders and turning to Erna. “To answer your question, General von Lehrgen was the main objector in our chain of command to using someone as young as Tanya was for dangerous missions.” Erna cocked her head to the side. “Was he the one that came with you to unload the books?” Tanya nodded. “I should have guessed. His uniform looked more like...exciting than I’m used to.” “Erna,” Tanya said sharply, pinching her nose. Her tendency of seeing what she could get away with when not called out and shut down immediately hadn’t changed since childhood. There was enough of a chance Erna’s phrasing had been intentionally calculated to annoy her that it was best dealt with before it got there. “Tanya!” Erna gasped putting a hand to her chest dramatically, as Visha giggled along. “I’m sworn to a holy order. You know I just meant…” She trailed off, lifting her hands to trace intricate designs in the air to mimic collar arabesques. While Visha wasn’t looking, she turned to give Tanya an obvious and over-telegraphed wink as a reminder they were in on a joke together about how unseriously Erna took her vows. “You’re usually the most uncomfortable person in a room full of kids,” Erna went on with a laugh. “But I think he had you beat. It was kind of sweet.” “How come it’s only sweet when it’s not me?” Tanya griped. “Because he’s like-,” Erna stood up from her chair and puffed up her chest comically. “Mr. Important with his difficult manly job, and when Heinz started crying he’s looking around for help like fixing this simple problem is too much. He got all frozen up. Heinz wanted the book with the lion on the cover was all.” “And…?” “And you don’t look scared. You look annoyed. That’s just mean.” “Heinz cried about everything when I was there after the war. I thought he would have grown out of it by now. I was disappointed in his lack of progress.” “It’s a good thing you aren’t actually at risk of having kids.” “Now who’s being mean?” Tanya said with a triumphant smirk, eager to move along so she could get back to calculating her next maneuver for thwarting a not-at-all-likely-to-be-misused Army Youth Program. Now that she’d put her own name at arm’s length, the next step was gathering information. “Do you know who came by from the Army?” To ask about helping out with the kids?” “Not really,” Erna shrugged. Without asking, she reached for one of Visha’s candies. She unwrapped it and popped it in her mouth before continuing. “S’it matter?” Tanya waited for her to chew and swallow so her next reply wouldn’t come muffled by food. “I’m just curious,” she said mildly. “Do you mind asking?” “Okay,” Erna agreed hesitantly. “But my job’s more about obedience than questioning, you know. Besides, it was some lady that came by about it.” Tanya hummed in annoyance. More likely than not, it was an officer’s wife. Past a certain rank, they were expected to do some amount of charitable work. That introduced new possibilities, none of them good. First off, in the case this effort had nefarious intentions from the start, the officer in question was sharp enough to put a screen of plausible deniability in place. In life, more so than in war, stupid enemies were your most important allies, and she wasn’t going to have one. Regardless of whether it was intentional or not, the illusion of separation itself was problematic. It would be harder for her to indirectly pressure the project into nonexistence when it wasn’t an officially designated project. Harping on the optics wouldn’t be convincing; mentioning the system could be taken advantage of would be like saying she didn’t trust the corporate bigwigs’ vision for the company. Investigating upfront herself was a last resort, which was why she was asking Erna. Tanya would have to give a reason why she cared, which in itself was rather obvious - she was a former orphan herself. That meant she’d be expected to approve, making it both awkward to later switch sides and further entwining her name with the project. On the other hand, given her background she’d have to give a solid reason for disapproving, which would be unwise until she knew who it was coming from and how important it was to them. “Just ask,” she requested. “Too bad it isn’t Sister Dora that handles outside charity,” Erna snickered, naming one of the nuns that ran the kitchen. “I might be able to persuade her by showing off a little…” She reached down and grabbed the hem of her habit. “...skin!” she declared dramatically, cackling as she revealed a calf covered by thick wool. Visha howled along while Tanya digested the information. “Huh,” she concluded. “I never got that from her.” “Yeah well,” Erna rolled her eyes. “Last time you were around long, you were still staring jealously at me some mornings because I looked like an adult while you barely looked like a teenager. Dora hasn’t gotten that desperate.” Staying silent instead of snapping out a defensive rebuttal took up most of Tanya’s concentration, though she couldn’t help another check on the time that was left to her in purgatory. That gave Visha the space to add her own thoughts. “She used to do it to me too,” Visha chuckled. “Exactly how I did to Elya when we were roommates.” An eyebrow twitched in irritation. One-on-one with Visha or Erna, Tanya could keep enough control over the flow of conversation to satisfy what she was looking for in her relationship with them. Introduce a third party more similar to the other than to Tanya, and the effort began to feel like it wasn’t worth it. It was one of the many good reasons she hadn’t been found hanging around a gaggle of college girls once she was sufficiently past her original tenure as a student. Investments, of course, were all about the long term. That didn’t mean she didn’t find anything to like about the women in front of her right now, per se, only that it wasn’t the lone standard by which she measured. Both women were frequently opinionated. Neither clung frequently to illogical opinions. In that way, they brought unique insights to their conversations. Because they were sufficiently different from her, they were able to intuit things Tanya might like but not think of herself, like Visha’s gift of the cups from various coffeehouses around the city. In other words, their present value was the hard-to-quantify element of “enjoyable to be around.” There were days, however, that challenged that notion, like the immaturity that was the defining undercurrent of the day’s conversation. Tanya hadn’t seen much of it from Visha during the war, so hadn’t foreseen it as a potential problem. With Erna, she’d pretty much known what she was getting herself into, which was why she hadn’t been in touch terribly regularly in between getting her own place and concluding Erna was both helpful in personal contexts and not a religious nut. At times like this, it was tempting to resort to cold logic about the true value of companionship. Statistically, there had to be numerous other people in a city the size of Berun that Tanya would find enjoyable to socialize with, and whom she’d also find it somewhat more straightforward to deal with. At a certain point, the cost of locating them became justified. Tanya sighed, trying to keep it unnoticed by either person sharing the room with her. Having to “grow up” again had added so many unwanted complications to her life she couldn’t list them all if she tried. In defense of the people sharing the room with her, Tanya could recognize that when she’d been of a truly similar age, she wouldn’t have been so bothered by the overly-unserious behavior. Maybe not as enthusiastic, but she’d have laughed along easier. It was no damning condemnation of Visha or Erna’s personalities that they sometimes acted their age. Not only would they be likely to grow better attuned to her over the next decade, but both had a real value outside of mere friendship. Visha’s case went without saying. With proper training she’d be a credit to most jobs she was hired for, and in an unhappier future, she might end up having Tanya’s back once again. Maintaining a good rapport was a must. Erna was a less obvious candidate for being useful in the future. Mainly, Tanya was counting on her for emergencies. In the worst case scenario, Erna had some pull with the Catholic Church when it decided to start evacuating its members to other countries. Tanya furrowed her brow in concentration, determined not to react in a way that damaged relationships she held dear to her, despite their occasional flaws. Her next challenge was to formulate a better response. The thing was, Tanya was on the precipice of giving into irrationality via rationality. She had logical reasons over and above vague emotional impulses for wanting to keep up her camaraderie with the two people in front of her. For that, she was willing to put up with things she didn’t necessarily enjoy. That kind of exchange was the very essence of her core belief system. Altogether, it was more sensible for her to make a conscious effort to find what enjoyment she could in moments she’d have previously written off as a net loss. Like Visha and Erna, at one point she’d been more receptive to personal expression done purely for entertainment’s sake. There was no reason to take it as settled fact that she couldn’t do so again. In time, her peers would catch up with her in emotional development and they’d all happily put the past behind them. Until then, under certain circumstances, Tanya had to believe she was better off trying to concentrate on the silver lining instead of the dark cloud. With that in mind, she had to respond to the joke in kind, and have fun at her friends’ expense. Fun for the sake of fun, just because she could. Visha and Erna were both eyeing her cautiously in the wake of her silence. Probably, they suspected she was fishing around for a more powerful charge to level at them than what she’d hit both with earlier to shut them up. The truth was, when it came to body image envy, she had a big advantage. Try as she might not to spoil her literary tastes by reading Elya’s magazines, Tanya couldn’t prevent herself from catching glimpses of the photos. “It’s too bad,” she shrugged smoothly, putting a smile on her face she didn’t quite feel, yet was determined to try to. “It should have been you all hoping to look like me all along. In case you didn’t know, boyish figures are all the rage.” Both her companions visibly relaxed. A positive start. “Seriously,” Visha lamented. “You’d look so good in every cute dress that’s coming out now, but you won’t wear any. Even your hair’s almost right.” “Serebryakov, you’re thinking of it wrong.” Tanya shook her head in mock disappointment. “You know I always told you to think several steps ahead.” “Yes…?” she replied, eyes sliding from Tanya over to Erna like she was hoping the other woman would give her a clue. Predictably, Erna was no help. “Trust me, one day, this will be the height of fashion,” Tanya said assuredly, gesturing at her outfit. “I’m in it for the long war here.” She accepted the other two were probably laughing for different reasons. Tanya because of the ironic grain of truth, Visha and Erna because imagining the plain and functional ensemble would ever be a desirable outfit for women sounded ridiculous. There was no helping it. “Speaking of the long war…” Visha said, leaning down to shuffle a hand around under her bed. She came up with a newspaper, which she promptly threw onto Tanya’s lap. “It seems like things are going the way you wanted.” Tanya glanced at the article mentioning that other countries were beginning to concern themselves about the continuing unrest in the Empire’s far east. Catching Erna’s curious look, she turned towards her to give a brief explanation. Precisely as she’d hoped, leaving the burden of putting down a rebellious faction of Polaskan nationalists mostly on the shoulders of the official standing army was providing a relatively safe and convenient opportunity to showcase the diplomatic overreach of the disarmament clauses. The mysterious element the mages added only helped. At some point, the rest of the world would catch on. For now, well, the Empire could claim it didn’t have the resources to go chasing down hypotheticals. Undeniably, the full force of their sanctioned military strength would be enough to deal with it. If the full force could be brought to bear, at least. Realistically, their garrisons along the Rhine weren’t exactly the main reason the Republic wasn’t crossing it. Still, it was unreasonable to expect a country of the Empire’s size to need to evacuate its other outposts to put down localized internal unrest. “Come to think of it,” Visha said, absently twirling a piece of hair around a finger, “the parts of the Federation near the border have some majority-Polaskan areas. I wonder if they’ll get any ideas.” As it stood, a surge of ethno-nationalism would do greater harm to most other major powers than it would to the Empire. They no longer had much in the way of colonies or peripheral territories to lose. Visha was bringing up the same false hope Tanya had expressed to Zettour and passed off as optimistic patriotism. She’d trusted him to be intelligent enough to see through it, and rightfully so. He was proceeding with a cool head. “Honestly, Stalyn’s probably praying that does happen,” Tanya sighed. “We shouldn’t be.” She glanced up at the clock once more. She had enough of the day left to get into the weeds, and a willing audience. As much as she enjoyed a good battle of the wits, there was something nice about having the space to explore her own thoughts without worrying too much that she was going to be out-argued over a minor error. Tanya stood up and poured three glasses of water from the pitcher on Visha’s table. Once she was resettled, she made her opening statement. “It’s tempting to think any communist regime is as bad as another,” she admitted, with an understanding smile at the sentiment, “and that there isn’t much difference between sharing a long border with them, whether it’s the Polaskan People’s Republic or the Federated Soviet State of Polaska.” Tanya paused and took a sip of her water, straightening her shoulders upon noticing the somewhat defeated slump they’d taken. With international geopolitics ruling an inordinate number of her life decisions in the past decade, her practical nature had put her in a near-constant position of committing herself to causes she objected to. “Ideologically, they might be interchangeable. In our less-than-ideal current state of the world, they aren’t. I’d take living next to the former any day.” That much alone would be sufficient for Visha to grasp why Tanya didn’t want the Polaskans hassling the Federation too much, gratifying as it might be to watch. Her quick mind had been blinded by a justifiable hatred of Moskva’s leadership; Tanya had reminded her to widen her perspective. Erna, on the other hand, was somewhat of a wildcard. She wasn’t unintelligent. She was rather sheltered when it came to caring about world events. With no good way of assessing Erna’s ability to deduce her logic, Tanya gave an apologetic glance to Visha and dove into the details. Sad as it was to say, the best policy to take with established communist nations was to leave them completely to their own devices on the domestic front. In the end, trying to upend their economy or overthrow a hated dictator resulted in a convenient narrative for why their plans weren’t working. Even better, the propaganda practically wrote itself. Capitalists were afraid of seeing communism be successful, which explained the constant attempts at sabotage. Communism was a self-defeating economic system. And a self-defeating political system in its current form, with various factions unable to agree on whose version of it was “right” - as if one existed. Eventually, people would realize and it would collapse on itself. At great human cost, true. A cost which only grew the longer the people living under its thumb had an enemy to agree on besides the Comintern. In the power-play that had occurred in the wake of the ceasefire, the Federation had wanted to incorporate Polaska into its territory. The rest of the powers wanted it carved out as “neutral”. In other words, capitalist-friendly. All that everyone had agreed on, albeit silently, was that free and fair elections with no outside interference had been completely impossible under the circumstances. As a result, the temporary occupiers of government buildings had been handed the formal trappings of power, owing more to good timing than overwhelming popular support. However, the country was to remain independent of the Federation instead of becoming a member state. Most importantly for Tanya, that meant the Federation couldn’t launch a large-scale invasion of Imperial land without giving them advance warning and triggering some major alarm bells internationally. At best, the Federation could occupy a single, non-contiguous piece of Imperial territory that provided crucial quantities of neither food nor industrial material. With her apologies to the Polaskans, Tanya was counting on a foreign country sweeping through their territory to be a red line in the Empire’s favor this time. That only worked as long as the Federation wasn’t handed a semi-legitimate pretext for sending their military into another country. The Polaskans destabilizing a region of the Federation could do just that. Tanya checked the clock again, something she’d done occasionally throughout the conversation to measure how much of it she was taking up. Ideally, she wanted Visha and Erna to hit it off well enough not to require constant input from her. Having each other to talk to would give Tanya an excuse to do nothing more than nod along occasionally when they wanted to talk about subjects that weren’t of interest to her. To do that, they couldn’t leave feeling like their main point of common ground had been poking fun at their youngest friend, which meant giving them space to converse between themselves. “What do you keep looking at the time for?” Visha asked, curling her bottom lip into a pout. “Trying to leave me already?” “No!” Tanya said. Flustered by the implication she was such a bad friend and unable to answer truthfully without sounding like a worse one, Tanya would admit the answer came out somewhat defensively. “No. Just - ahh - nothing. It’s nothing.” “I had a question,” Erna said, hand halfway raised like she was a student and Tanya her teacher. “If things did happen in Polaska and the Federation took it over, wouldn’t that be a bit better for us? Like, it couldn’t come up in our politics anymore because it would be totally off-limits. It would calm some people down that way.” Erna was surprisingly reasonable once she started thinking things through, it would seem. Actually, her problem here was that she was thinking too reasonably. She was also surprisingly interested in something Tanya had assumed she’d grown bored of ten minutes ago. “If the world worked like that, it would look very different,” Tanya laughed. “I wish that were true. In reality, it would drive mildly crazy people much crazier and it would become all they talked about.” With a firm nod, Tanya put that matter to rest. For the next decade or so, the best world for her resulted from people taking what was simultaneously the easiest and most difficult course of action - doing absolutely nothing. Mostly, what she needed to secure her future happiness was to buy time. The safest place she could put herself was in the Unified States. That much was obvious. The devil was in the details of how she’d get there if she needed to. For now, Tanya was something of a persona non grata everywhere in the western hemisphere that didn’t speak Germanian. Knowing the Unified States, she was sure they’d gladly hand her a visa regardless, so long as she fulfilled certain conditions. She had still less interest in serving as a mage in another country than she did in the Empire. While she wasn’t banking on her home country winning another war, for Tanya personally, her safety came down not to who had a better army overall, but who had the best mages and associated technology. Mage units were unique in that they were much harder than average for non-mage units to kill, so the total deadly force of the opposing party was of less worry to her than the specific talents of who she’d be up against. To put it simply, she’d rather fight a losing war with her old comrades than face them down while on the winning side. Beyond that, she’d also have the Type 95 for emergency use if she stayed in the Empire. It’s existence brought up another thorny issue. It would be entirely reasonable for the U.S. Army to demand Tanya prove the rumors about her magical abilities were more than rumors before tendering employment. With a standard-issue orb, she’d prove she was a decent mage. Good, but nothing special. Even if she wanted to take that deal, there was no saying it was going to be offered to her. Both her concern of safety and performance led back to the same conclusion: she needed to carve out another niche for herself to step into and hope that if and when the time came, her reputation was enough to carry her across the Atlantic. Really, she wasn’t asking for much. Just a life of predictability, a few creature comforts, and a low risk of early and violent death. Tanya had two years of solid office performance under her belt now, a credential she’d been sorely lacking the last time she put her feelers out into the employment market. With that, she’d passed an important benchmark from a corporate standpoint. She’d signalled she could stick it out though a few ups and down in a job without a gun to her head. A third year in her current role and she’d prove she not only understood the bare minimum standards for a salaryman, but was willing to go above them. The timing aligned nearly perfectly with the expiration date of her unofficial employment with the Army. The time had come to do more than make herself generically appealing to the average hiring manager. It was time to get specific about who might actually want to hire her. As of January, she’d have a year and a half left on the clock before she turned twenty. In light of that, she knew what her New Year’s resolution was going to be: finding a way to get in touch with the right kinds of people without jeopardizing her relationship with her current management. Tanya stretched, feeling energized by the thought. She was growing so complacent with her new place in life she was at risk of starting to like it. That, of course, was when the next disaster would strike, because she’d stopped paying attention. Her fear wasn’t that she’d be outright fired over looking for another job. Neither Lehrgen nor Romel came across as that vindictive. She’d more than hinted that at some theoretical future point she may not be in their chain of command. Both had taken it without acrimony. Managing the transition itself wouldn’t be so easy. There’d be ample opportunity to ruin relationships Tanya had spent more than half her second life building. Unfortunately, the two people in question didn’t have particularly similar personalities, and wouldn’t handle rejection the same way. Her gut instinct told her that her effort would be better spent keeping in Lehrgen’s good graces. It was only logical. By the time she needed to really worry about where the Army saw the Empire’s future heading, Romel was likely to be retired and Lehrgen another step closer to the top. Momentarily, a nurse came in to check on them while making her rounds. As soon as she left, Erna graciously adhered to Tanya’s plan for her by enquiring as to which members of the staff Visha liked best, allowing the two to trade gossip about their favorites and least favorites within their circles. All Tanya had to do was make the odd noise of surprise or agreement to what Erna had to say about the other nuns. Otherwise, she was free to get lost in her own thoughts. Since looking at the clock had been too obvious, she glanced surreptitiously at her watch every so often to accurately gauge the time as it crawled by. That way, she wouldn’t interrupt and redirect the discussion too early into the process of her friends cementing the foundation of a friendship with each other. Tanya briefly considered jumping in to ask Visha about that one emergency room nurse who hadn’t been able to so much as fake a polite attitude towards her. She very quickly thought better of it. It was mere idle curiosity. Tanya didn’t really care what some unnamed woman thought of her, nor of Visha’s special treatment. However, showing interest in one small part would draw her inexorably into the whole dissection as a full participant. Besides, Visha might take it to heart and get anxious over the idea that someone out there didn’t like her. “So…” Visha said, catching eyes with her as Tanya tried to keep her focus on the present instead of watching the second hand make its rounds on her watch face. She had promised to herself she’d make that effort. “Tanya. What do you have going on after this?” Tanya tried to keep her smile to herself. If the questions were turning to her, it meant her two companions had successfully exhausted each other’s desires to pick apart other people’s lives. “It’s General von Lehrgen’s birthday on Monday,” she sighed. “I’ve got to go buy something.” “Mmm…” Erna hummed skeptically, crossing her arms with a squint. “I don’t think guys really care about getting presents after they’re grown up. It’s not like they want to come home to flowers or something.” “Wanting to feel acknowledged and appreciated is a shared trait among all humans,” Tanya assured her. “I wouldn’t want to fail to return the favor.” “Even so,” Visha said. She adopted a similar posture to Erna, arms over her chest and eyes half-closed in doubt. “He’s probably not going to expect one from you, at least. I think you’re safe not to worry about it.” Sensing a standoff, Tanya became the third to fall in line, her arms sliding across her midsection. “Fine,” she agreed. “But if you’re right, I exceed expectations. And if you’re wrong, at a minimum, I meet them. There’s no downside to it.” Both Visha and Erna appeared to remain unconvinced by the sound logic behind her argument. Not relishing the thought of trying to deprogram deeply-rooted traditionalist beliefs on genders and gift-giving, Tanya quickly forged ahead. She’d get nowhere trying to argue, so it was best to be clear that her mind was made up. “Anyway, I have a few options. Mainly, I’m just trying to decide which is best. I don’t want it to come off too…” she tried to explain, circling her hands in front of her to indicate she was having difficulty nailing down the precise sentiment. “...too much like I consider him a friend. I mean, that could get me in all kinds of trouble.” “Ahh,” Visha sighed, a gentle laugh tinging her voice. Tanya raised an eyebrow in question. “Sometimes I worry about you as a woman, I really do. But you’re alright.” Tanya dipped her head in acknowledgement. There was no doubt she was aware that if she wanted to be taken seriously, she had to avoid appearing overly ‘womanish’ - that was to say, sentimental - although frankly, she was mostly concerned about making sure she expressed she was keeping in mind that she and Lehrgen were coworkers over all else. For Visha’s own career, Tanya was glad to hear she too understood she had to watch her behavior more than she might think. “So,” Visha went on, still trying her best not to laugh. “When you got me my birthday present, were you thinking of me as a friend, or as a fellow member of the Army obligated to make herself fit to fight as soon as possible?” Tanya shook her head, feeling a bit of laughter overcome her at the bizarre suggestion. “No, no,” she chuckled. “That was just for you. To get better. As a friend. I did think about a book for him, but…” She drifted off, rubbing at her chin. Books were a nearly-universal present, which was why she was so annoyed they weren’t a possibility here. Like Visha’s compendium of magical healing methods, they could be catered to very personal needs or tastes, or they could be a suitably impersonal-yet-desirable gift. And often relatively cheap to boot. “I don’t know what’s really good that isn’t about the military, and me giving him a book on strategy would be kind of arrogant.” Tanya shrugged, mind running through, for the umpteenth time, whether there was anything in his life Lehrgen had complained about and, for the umpteenth time, landing on the obvious juxtaposition between his professed desire for fatherhood compared to his age and marital status. There wasn’t much else he was lacking. That being said, her present company might find some humor in his woes. “And it’s not like I can get him a book on how to take the fall and get married.” As soon as she made the jest, Erna’s eyes jumped to Visha with alarm, desperately searching for an answer to a silent question. Regardless of her lack of respect for religious traditions, Erna’s earlier comment had betrayed a distinctly regressive opinion about the average man. Sadly, she had little occasion to meet those of the adult variety, and by virtue of the orphanage mostly was only made aware of those men too indiscriminate to adequately provide for children before having them. To her, an unmarried man of Lehrgen’s age and stature likely indicated one thing - that he didn’t want a wife, precisely. Whether she was more horrified by the prospect itself or was more horrified Tanya would work side by side with such an individual, she couldn’t say. Thankfully, she was spared both the question and explanation. Visha gave a silent but firm shake of her head to the imploring tilt of Erna’s head. “Don’t do that,” Visha said with certainty, finishing her business with Erna and turning to look at Tanya. “I was joking,” Tanya declared, somewhat stridently, she’d admit. She felt much like Visha must have earlier when her own joke hadn’t landed. Obviously, Tanya recognized it would be insulting to purchase her boss some kind of love manual, were something like that to even exist. That said, given what Visha had mentioned earlier about altering missives, Tanya wasn’t clear that the other woman trusted in her ability to navigate such social niceties. “I wouldn’t,” she assured. “I mean, that would be...weird.” “Very weird,” Visha agreed. Unable to prevent herself from doing so, Tanya shot a final glance in Visha’s direction to indicate she was wounded by the implication she thought Tanya needed the lecture. “I was thinking maybe a new briefcase,” Tanya offered, throwing out the best - and most expensive - of her ideas to appease Visha’s concern. “His are always in some state of disrepair.” “Well,” Visha said, heaving a sigh. “That’s much better, I guess.” Tanya nodded along, already going through a mental exercise to deduce how much cash such a purchase would leave her to make sure she didn’t need to also stop by the bank while she was out. If Visha thought it was an adequate gift, she was sure that it was. She’d hoped Visha would object and coax her into something more reasonably-priced. The fact that she hadn’t meant something, seeing as she and Lehrgen came from a similar social class. All in all, it wasn’t such a bad thing, in light of Tanya’s earlier decision as to how to manage the current state of her friendship with Visha and Erna. Certainly, on a practical level, she begrudged spending more money where she could get away with spending less. However, she had to be clear what the excess was buying - friendship. Because Lehrgen clearly had his heart set on a career in the Army and she didn’t, it was beneficial to push for a progression towards a post-coworker state in their relationship when and where she could, so as to not lose it entirely in the future. Therefore, for the moment she and Lehrgen were more or less on the same page as far as Tanya’s assigned goal for the year. She’d found another harmless area to relax the strict professional code she usually kept in place, and she’d only be immiserating herself by making a point of proving she was the sort of dependable employee that never forgot that whatever else they were, they were coworkers first. The extra money she’d spend was a token of her investment into a future where they weren’t. At some point, she had to start putting her money where her mouth was. If she didn’t, no one was going to believe she had any intention of leaving the Army’s reach. Even if were she to stay, that would hurt her negotiating power. “Well, you can get going if you want,” Visha said. “That way, this doesn’t have to hang over your head all day.” Tanya’s breath came out in a huff of laughter and she shook her head to herself. In truth, she wasn’t preoccupied by the thought of shopping now that she’d settled the matter of what she was shopping for. There would have been little harm in putting her excursion off another hour. Nevertheless, Visha was correct in thinking that now that she’d completed one task for the day, the natural next step was to move onto another. Tanya had never been accused of being the least practical member of her friend group. She wasn’t about to start now. “Thanks,” she told Visha, rising from her seat. “If you don’t mind.” Visha shook her head, then stuck her arms out. Now that they’d spent a full calendar year separated from their old forms as officers, Visha was becoming increasingly less observant of formalities in Tanya’s presence. In the past few weeks, she’d begun saying goodbye with a friendly hug. Tanya stepped closer to her and they exchanged a brief embrace. Apparently seeing no need to observe any formalities with someone who was barely more than a perfect stranger, Erna took her place as soon as Tanya had walked a few paces towards the door. Unlike Tanya, Erna pulled back to talk while still half in each other’s personal space, both women grasping the other’s forearms. “I’m glad I finally got to meet you,” Erna said, smiling warmly. “Same here,” Visha nodded, returning the affectionate gaze, leaving Tanya to ponder the insanity of it. They’d begun the day determined to dislike each other. Now they looked like they’d kiss if Tanya asked nicely. And not a drop of alcohol consumed. Really. She was never going to understand women. 
 
 November 23, 1931General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 
No one really knew what they were doing. That was the truth. Take the architects of the General Staff Office, for example. At one point, presumably, someone who’d pretended they knew how to review plans had solicited bids from people who pretended they knew how to build things, and a lawyer who pretended he knew how to sue for breach of contract had presided over a flurry of signatures from people who pretended they’d read and understood the whole document they were signing, so then a building had gone up based on the understanding of people who’d never really understood each other. The architects, who supposedly knew how to properly ventilate a building, hadn’t known what they were doing. But then again, the people responsible for giving a thumbs up to the drawings for the ventilation system had known even less. The poor fucks responsible for building it had probably known the most, except they hadn’t known what else to do besides follow the idiotic orders handed down to them. A succession of people who didn’t know what they were doing, the grandest conspiracy mankind had ever invented, the one they all bought into, the gentlemen’s agreement they were all going to act like the people before them and around them weren’t playing a game with no rules besides the ones they’d made up, it was the only explanation why, in the highest office in one of the grandest buildings in the country, Erwin Romel’s person was being bombarded with attacks of dry, thirty-five degree air from all directions, forced out of rebellious heating pipes when the temperature outside was closer to zero. Did he really know what he was doing either? Obviously, the answer was no. Some people might disagree. Like everyone, they had no idea what they were talking about. Sure, on a relative basis, he was better at outmaneuvering someone else, but that was because he knew what some other guy who’d written a book said he knew about how battles worked, so he knew what his enemy was expecting the orthodox move to be, so in the end, he only knew what other people thought they knew, and what did they really know? When you thought about it, like him, the guy that wrote the book had also gotten famous for the same reason. And the guy that wrote the book before that. And on and on back through, all humans did was know about what other people claimed they knew about violence until you got to Cain whacking his brother with a stone. Now there was a man who knew something original about solving problems. Or maybe not. Trying to lie to a supposedly-omniscient entity didn’t exactly speak to him being a person who wasn’t making it up as he went along. Then again, who was to say God wasn’t doing the same? Looking at the way the world worked, you didn’t get the idea the guy knew more than the average person about doing his job. That was probably the root of it all. Humans were created in God’s image, ergo, like their Creator, they mostly went about life hoping no one noticed they were bullshitting their way through. Honestly, Erwin felt bad for the big man. All he had left was a couple more years playing his part convincingly to a discrete set of people that shared time and place with him. God was stuck pretending to everyone for all eternity. Real shit job, if you asked him. Erwin Romel did know a few things, he’d admit. Mostly, that complicated matters. If you didn’t know anything for sure, you could go along with whatever sounded best in the moment. Knowing one or two things was what was dangerous. And Erwin Romel knew, beyond a shadow of a doubt, even when he didn’t want to acknowledge it, that he loved his wife. He knew he loved his wife. He knew she didn’t deserve to grow old without someone there to enjoy it with. He also knew quitting wasn’t an option - he was sure as hell he wasn’t going to enjoy his final years when all the likely candidates to succeed him in such a powerful role had somewhat too strong of convictions that they truly knew what was right. The obvious answer, then, was to divorce Lucy, let her have her freedom so she could devote her twilight years to herself and not the demands of his job. There was just one problem with that. One teeny-tiny fucking problem. As a public figure, word of the divorce would make the newspapers. An honest journalist would stick a paragraph in the society pages stating that Erwin and Lucy Romel were splitting up, it wasn’t because of anything scandalous, so one could assume that in spite of one taking fault for it in the filing documents, they were mostly doing it for the reason that they’d decided it was better not to live together. But instead, the journalists, scared of revealing they didn’t know anything, would arbitrarily assign meanings to it. There’d be articles about how it was an omen that the Great General Romel was reinventing himself, speculation on how over the radio, tabloids running features that he’d lost his restraints and had nothing to lose anymore, so everyone prepare themselves, entire books written on what the decision said about his mental state at the time and how you could connect that to the reasons behind his other decisions, all of them, at least the ones anyone paid attention to, wrong, wrong, and wronger, with no copies sold by the one guy who got it right and told the boring truth, which would result in him convincing himself he was the incorrect one and didn’t know how to do his job. “You know, Erwin,” came through the fog of his rumination, Kurt von Schleichel smiling impishly across his desk at him. Kurt smiled too much for a man. Made him look like he was up to no good. Which was sometimes true. “I do have better things to do than sit here watching you daydream.” “Kurt,” he said, rubbing his left hand along the side of his face to wake back up. He knew what Kurt would say, because Kurt would be looking out for his best interests, not Lucy’s, because Kurt wasn’t in love with Lucy. Which was kind of rude of him, now that he thought about it. He couldn’t help a sigh. “It’s really hard when what you want to do as a person isn’t something a person in your position is allowed to do.” “Oh.” Kurt moved forward in his seat. “I guess you’ve had time to read Degurechaff’s paper too?” “Ha,” Romel barked out. “Let’s not let anyone catch me suggesting so.” As promised, Degurechaff had promptly spat out a full range of ideas on irregular warfare, magical and not, onto paper, like he’d asked. She’d kept to talking mostly about tactics the Empire’s own restive populations could turn against a larger oppressor. She’d helpfully included a bit about it also translating into additional resources the Empire might have at their disposal against their own more powerful enemies, in case he’d somehow missed the parallel. As he’d told her the time she’d mentioned it over drinks, it didn’t really sit right with him. He’d rather declare a proper war and lose it the right way than pussy-foot around noncommittally annoying an occupying force, making them crack down harder and harder, and then hope worldwide opinion turned against what now appeared to be excessive abuse of power in accomplishing whatever half-legitimate reason they’d given for the occupation in the first place. Degurechaff, now. There was someone more convinced than anyone he’d ever met that she knew exactly what it was she was doing, like she had a damn divine mandate. There was nothing more dangerous in a person, up to and including bloodlust. It was what made her so fun to listen to, and what had earned her a reputation for recklessness. That had been hard enough to deal with in the Army. It was a good thing she was coming back to them soon enough. To his knowledge, no one else got to keep their employees in line with an in-house punishment system and threats of summary execution. Maybe criminal enterprises. The Army wasn’t that much different than one, if you thought about it. “Honestly,” he griped to Kurt, “I could mean a lot of things. Like, I know as commander-in-chief I’m not supposed to use the resources at my disposal to track down all the people responsible for the building’s heating system and stage unfortunate accidents for them. But as a person...it’s really fucking hot in here, don’t you think?” Kurt slapped a knee and laughed, then his seriousness returned. “Well, what do you think of her ideas?” “Secret depots disguised where they blast for mining? Homemade anti-tank shells we can bury safely and only trigger with an orb when we need them? A trained civilian force that has orbs? The suggestion that technically, any country’s free to sell military-grade orbs to civilians because all that’s stopping it is that we’ve all realized what a disaster that would end up?” It was Romel’s turn to laugh. That girl wanted her orb back with a passion. “Kurt, I can’t put my name on something like this. I’m not even allowed to put my name on divorce papers.” “She’s right most of it wouldn’t violate prevailing laws.” “And last I checked, I’m well within my legal rights to end things with my own damned wife. Except everyone will have things to say about it when they learn.” “I think the trick is to not let other people learn,” Kurt chuckled. “Someday, somehow, they will.” Romel leaned back and crossed his arms on top of his head. “And then my name’s on it. I’ll let someone else have the pleasure.” It was hard not to feel bad for whoever succeeded him. That was the guy that would make it or break it. Everyone would be recovered enough by then to get fidgety about old disputes. You got to a certain age, and honestly, dying soon started sounding pretty damn great. “Seriously,” he continued, kicking his feet up on the desk this time. “You have to respect that Ildoan motherfucker. Decided he was going to give the middle finger to what anyone else thought so he could do things how he wants. I’m not so sure how I feel about what he wants, but still, you have to respect it.” “I wouldn’t worry too much about it coming to blows with him,” Kurt frowned. “If our relationship with them starts getting testy, we might have something we can lean on. If you’d bothered to go down deep enough in the classified parts of Lehrgen’s file you’d have found he dutifully recorded he’s both met Berluscone’s right hand man and judged him appallingly corruptible.” “Keeping such close tabs on your own subordinates like that,” Erwin clucked, wagging a finger knowingly. “Kurt, Kurt, Kurt.” “Oh, like he isn’t doing it back,” Kurt objected. “In that same trip to Ildoa, he got to know one of our better intelligence assets. If he wants to play in the grown-up sandbox where you can only trust all of about two people, so be it. I’m sure he’d love to catch me getting tripped up somewhere.” “Don’t,” Romel grunted. “Whatever it is you do, don’t let him find a reason to come running to me over it. Then I’ll have to publicly pick between you two, and fuck, Kurt, I had so much trouble picking a wife I got an illegitimate daughter out of it. Not like I’ve changed much since then.” Kurt snickered, then pursed his lips in judgement. “Anyway, from how I heard it, Berluscone’s mostly interested in power so he can go on philandering at his leisure.” “Don’t make me any more jealous than I already am,” Erwin groaned. “I bet he can divorce whoever he wants.” Kurt’s frown deepened. The rest of his face screwed up into an unflattering squint, rat-like with his sharp features and beady eyes. “You know, there’ll be people here that want a strongman like that of our own. You’d make a better fit for it than your Ildoan inspiration.” That made Romel fly forward in his seat. Just what he needed - a job with more things he didn’t know what to do about. Nothing like a proposed dictatorship to unrelax your posture. Kurt had a habit of getting carried away if you didn’t tell him no. Luckily, that was one of the handful of things Romel knew how to do very well. “Not a chance in hell.” “All I was saying is you should be aware some people might want to cast you in the role,” Kurt said, holding his hands up in a placating gesture. Romel reached for a cigar and lit it. Not a suggestion, then. Shit like this was why he kept Kurt so close. He had a particular knack for understanding the idiotic whims of the worst class of bullshitters - politicians - and the people that elected them. “I’m warning you to be careful you don’t accidentally encourage it. You might want to complain about our elected leaders less colorfully. Even to people you think it’s safe to.” “I dunno,” Romel yawned, taking up his previous posture now that he knew he could relax again, feet on the desk and hands clasped behind his head. “If I told Lucy I not only wasn’t retiring but planning on taking over the country, that would definitely make her divorce me.” The two stared at each other across the desk. One second. Two. Three. Predictably, it was Kurt that broke first, though Erwin wasn’t far behind. Laughter bounced off the walls of the room for a minute, until they had to stop to fan the sweat off their faces that the minor exertion had caused. “And maybe the fucking Chancellor’s office has a working heating system,” Romel shrugged as an afterthought. “Strauss wouldn’t be so fat if he spent all day in a sauna.” “It’s not like anyone’s here to keep you to decorum,” Kurt said with a wink. He winked too much for a man, too. “Just me, and I seem to have some memories of some very indecorous nights your head spend over the toilet in academy.” “Always beat you on the run the next morning, though.” “That you did,” Kurt conceded, fingers reaching to unbutton his jacket. Those went over the backs of their chairs. With a glance in the other’s direction, white button-downs came next. Suspenders reset over undershirts, now they really did look like sleazy underworld bosses. “You ever think we’d be here?” Kurt asked, folding his shirt to place on the desk. “Back then?” “Hell no,” Erwin laughed. “I got way too many write-ups before I had to settle down for Lucy.” “I did,” Kurt said. “I knew we were made for better stuff than most of the rest.” “And that’s why I’m the boss,” Erwin said. “I didn’t know shit. I just did it.” They took their seats again, the unpleasant feel of damp skin on leather when he leaned back forcing Romel to sit properly in his chair. He was the boss. And he sure as hell was going to see to it he reminded Kurt the boss wasn’t doing anything stupid to provoke the rest of the world. “I don’t want to hear anything about plans based on this,” he said, tapping his finger down on Degurechaff’s paperwork. The last thing he wanted was to have to fire his friend for the sake of appearances. “If I did, I’d have to do something about it, you understand?” Kurt crossed his arms. “Have you heard anything about me going behind your back?” “No.” This time it was Erwin that cracked a smile. For reasons he absolutely couldn’t fathom, he was a man of few friends. The ones he did have made up for it. They kept his best interests at heart, often at the expense of their own. “I’m a bit disappointed about that, actually.” The startled look on people’s faces when he got them good was always worth it. Unlike the Master of Smiles across from him, Erwin could keep a straight face as long as he needed to for a joke. “W-w-what do you-” “By now, I’d expected you to orchestrate a situation for me that earned a painless divorce with public support behind it,” he chuckled. “Obviously, I couldn’t have meant anything else.” Nervous laughter echoed in the dry heat again, Kurt’s only this time. “I guess I’ll have to do it myself,” Erwin went on, laughing at his own joke. “We’ll get one of the girls downstairs, take a compromising photo, have it published and pretend it wasn’t us. Then I’ll come out and say it just looks bad, I was rejecting her lurid advances, but as a man of honor, I’m going to do the right thing and let Lucy get rid of her troublesome husband.” “Sure, sure,” Kurt laughed back. “I’ll go see which is the prettiest one that’s interested.” “Hey now,” Erwin said, shaking an accusatory finger at his friend. “Clearly, they’ll all be competing for the honor. But I can only afford to conspire if someone else is willing to take the fall. A trustworthy one who’ll back up my claims of innocence.” Another thought struck him and Erwin frowned. The world was a degenerate place, and people only knew how degenerate they were so were going to extrapolate that onto him, never knowing he wouldn’t do that to Lucy. Anymore. Maybe he’d changed a little with age. “Anyway,” he sighed. “If she’s too pretty, no one will believe I was turning her down.” “I guess doing your dirty work is what I’m here for,” Kurt shrugged, playing the joke out another step. “Whatever it may be.” “Exactly that,” Erwin nodded, falsely serious. “Can you imagine what Lehrgen’s face would look like if you weren’t here and he had to be the one doing it instead?” He could see it now. The stunned look, eyes trying to unsuccessfully search his boss’s face to see if it was a joke. He wouldn’t find anything there. Erwin’s poker face was better than anyone’s he knew. Eventually, he’d make a face - well, get going, something like that - Lehrgen would gingerly wince and turn around to go do what he was told like a good boy. Almost out the door, Erwin would toss out that he was just kidding, and then the eyes that had drawn together in judgment would fight not to roll, that flash of I kind of hate you coming through that the other man could never stop when Erwin got carried away poking fun at Lehrgen’s inability to figure out when he was playing around and when he wasn’t. One day, Lehrgen might understand. You had to take your humor where you could find it when you sat in his seat. Wasn’t like he was allowed to mess around with anyone else. Lucy yelled at him if he did it to her, and God forbid he tried it on either of the children. “I guess we’d find out which girl around here Lehrgen likes the least,” Erwin pondered aloud. “Well…” Kurt drawled, tilting his head to the side with a guilty smile. “Oh, you’re sick,” Erwin coughed, trying not to laugh so loud someone came to check. “You’re real sick.” Romel puffed out his cigar smoke in a discontented huff, trying to let go of his humor to be serious for a moment. As much as he liked Degurechaff, you had to be careful how you worked with her. He didn’t need her and Kurt feeding off each other’s desire to invade Russland one day. Or anywhere at all, as far as Degurechaff was concerned, he wasn’t sure the “where” was terribly important. The wrong words from Kurt to her and she’d run with it. Way too far. Well, a new conflict would certainly make what people said about his and Lucy’s marital decisions a moot point. Maybe he’d keep that as a backup option. “You’d have to be careful with her as a co-conspirator anyway,” Romel nodded. “She’s smart, so if you just give her the gist of the situation and let her use your own judgment, she’ll basically figure out what it is you want. Sometimes better than you can figure your own self out. Not like most dumb fuckers out there who can’t wipe their ass without orders.” Romel took another slow puff off his cigar and picked up that paper of hers that was on his desk. “On the other hand, take something like this.” He shook it for emphasis. “You tell her: Deguarechaff, I want you to find as many people as you can you think you can train up to be useful as civilian militia-mages. And you think, alright, she’ll get together some old veterans who’ll have an easy time learning some new tricks, won’t scare easy, so on.” Romel took a breath and let it out, half-laugh, half-sigh. “Next you heard, she’d be showing you a bunch of seven-year-olds and telling you they might not look so useful, but they can self-destruct an orb as well as anyone, and given their unsuspicious nature they can go most places without getting searched. As a bonus, due to their insufficient fear of mortality, they’re the least likely to disobey suicide orders. They won’t even realize until it’s too late.” Romel shook his head. “Not because she wants them to die particularly, but because you told her to train up anybody who could be useful.” The cautionary tale worked better than he’d have liked. It was effective enough on his own psyche that he immediately shoved the paper that contained mentions of intentionally self-destructing orbs in the nearest drawer. “All I’m saying is be careful what you tell her you want to her to do.” With a snort, he figured he could bring the conversation back to the unfortunate place it had started. “So for this Lucy plot, if she got involved, I think the picture would come out looking like I frequent one of those weird underground clubs. I mean, I’m trying to come out of this with some of my dignity preserved.” At that mental image, Kurt had to turn away to regain his composure. Whether it was laughter or disgust, Erwin didn’t care to know. “I was going to see her after this,” Kurt commented, once he’d gotten his breath back. “So tell her thanks but no thanks on that paper?”“I’m not saying that,” Romel replied. “You should hear her out. I’m sure she’ll say something you need to hear. Whether you’ll want to hear it or not’s debatable. I wouldn’t mention what you’re going to do with her suggestions just yet.” He coughed and corrected himself. “Or not going to do, I suppose I should say. She’ll eventually figure it out, I’m sure, and then we’re probably in for trouble some way or another.” Romel smiled to himself. Somehow, it made him feel bad to disappoint Degurechaff by not using any of her plan, except perhaps defensively. It was an idea that some other demented mind might dream up that he’d need to deal with one day. Or maybe he just wasn’t used to seeing women disappointed in him. Except Lucy. That might be it. “Of course, I’ll blame it on you,” Romel said, humming contentedly at the thought. He looked at his chosen scapegoat and returned the wink from earlier. “That’s the nice part about being the boss.” 
 xXx 
At the sound of a knock on her door, Tanya looked up from her work. Seeing the face of her boss’s boss peeking through the gap, she pushed her papers aside. Her so-far pitiful attempts to recreate the sort of capacity metrics that underlay the staffing decisions of modern corporations could wait. No one even knew she was doing it. Hastily, she stood up respectfully and waved General von Schleichel in. So far, her impressions of him were nothing short of favorable. Unlike the average military man, he had a keen sense of what his audience wanted beyond obedient order-taking or stiff patriotism. It made him perfect for his role as the Army’s political fixer. He was Romel’s spokesperson more than his mouthpiece, who knew how to express to their ultimate arbiters what the big man wanted in a way that made the government amenable to agreeing. Even more uniquely, Tanya didn’t get the sense Schleichel’s ambitions began and ended with his rank in the Army. As it stood, he would be one of the contenders for the top spot when Romel stepped down, assuming Schleichel didn’t plan his departure simultaneously. There was a strong possibility his continued presence in the armed forces was due to friendship with their Commander-in-Chief. She’d once overheard a mention that personal loyalty to Romel was what was holding Schleichel back from pursuing his own dreams. His enthusiasm for Tanya’s ideas surrounding privatization of non-essential military services gave her an inkling of what those goals might be. Nobody was more excited about a profitable link between government and industry than someone in a position to take advantage of the revolving door being created. Basically, Schleichel had already made a name for himself as a power broker. There was only one more upwards move he could make in his current career path, and it was far from guaranteed he’d be nominated for the title after Romel. What was, however, guaranteed, was that he could translate his pull with the political class and the Army to land himself an extremely lucrative position with a military contractor, assuming he used his time in the military to make sure they were a viable business model. Power and then money - they were common motivations, and therefore predictable. There were few traits she liked better in a business connection. She would happily welcome an impromptu skip-level meeting with such a man. “Degurechaff,” Schleichel greeted, taking a chair. Tanya reseated herself a moment later. “Just dropping by to say thank you for that paper you turned in this morning.” “You’ve read it already, sir?” she asked, raising an eyebrow. It had been a mere matter of hours. He nodded. “And?” Tanya went on. “If I may ask, that is.” “Inventive ideas,” Schleichel said. “I wish I knew where you got them from.” Unfortunately, decades of post-colonial proxy wars and power struggles wasn’t an acceptable answer to her update of guerilla-warfare tactics to include mages. She went with a shrug instead. “Laying homemade mines under roads traveled by civilians,” Schleichel shook his head, letting out a disbelieving laugh. “I know,” Tanya sighed, looking down. It was a surprise, after the last war, that there was still shock value left when it came to tactical deployments. Regardless, it was important her leaders were apprised of the possibility they needed to prepare for someone to use it against them one day. “I know, sir, but-,” “No need to explain yourself to me.” Schleichel held up a hand. “An army does need someone to suggest the unsuggestible, I suppose.” Tanya grinned to herself. Like most of her superiors so far, Schleichel more or less had his head screwed on straight about what the purpose of a soldier was. He didn’t flinch and look away from peeling back the noble cover to expose the unsightly underbelly. No good would come of pretending there were lines out there that no one would cross. They would, it was their job to take it into account, and Tanya was receiving high marks on her ability to do just that. “Do you foresee doing anything about it soon?” she asked. “Not soon,” Schleichel said, practically tripping over his words in a rush to assure her she was getting ahead of herself in thinking the Empire was facing the prospect of endless tit-for-tats with their Polaskan population. “I wouldn’t say soon.” “Ah,” she sighed, somewhat disappointed the scenarios she’d presented weren’t yet being acknowledged as serious threats. A bit prematurely disappointed, perhaps. The skirmish with the Polaskan separatists showed few signs of turning into a decades-long nightmare. “I guess that’s for the best.” Schleichel’s eyes shifted left for a second before he turned them back to Tanya to give a nod. She’d seen the gesture a thousand times before. It was a part of the standard repertoire of approved Salaryman methods for expressing personal disapproval for how your superior had instructed you to handle things. “I’m a bit surprised,” Tanya admitted, an opening gambit to see if she could suss out the source of the disagreement. “General Romel seemed quite interested in the topic when I brought it up a month ago.” Schleichel, it turned out, was a bit of a tough nut to crack. He merely stared at her with his eyebrows lifted a hair, waiting for her to continue instead of giving into the natural urge to fill in his own half of the conversation. There was somewhat of a delicate dance to it: she presented him with the opportunity to explain and reveal a little too much; by passing, he turned the tables and forced her to do the explaining. Doubtless, the skill served him well as a political wheeler-dealer. “I guess that’s no different than usual,” Tanya shook her head dismissively. There was some truth to that, these days. Romel liked to talk about action more than take action. Not that she was complaining. In any event, it should have been no surprise that Romel had been more interested in going back and forth with her at the beer hall than implementing any new plans. “He spends plenty of our time getting nostalgic about our best moments during the war,” she explained. Her intended concluding remark to put the topic to rest was, in a word, a failure. A complete and utter failure. More than the slight concern or disappointment Tanya had that Romel wasn’t entirely above wanting to relive past moments of glory, Schleichel looked nothing short of betrayed. Luckily, she immediately recognized her misstep and could act to prevent it from spiraling into professional disaster. Regardless of fault, there were few things worse than one colleague going to another colleague with an accusatory statement beginning with Tanya said… Like herself, Schleichel was an individual who saw the profit of living in peaceful times, further evidenced by his unhappy reaction to hearing that Romel was somewhat less enamored of them. Unlike her, Schleichel had no preconceptions about who his friend might be in another situation. The material circumstances differed enough in her new world - in part thanks to her own doing, she’d like to think - that she had a reasonable hope history repeating itself wasn’t an inevitability. That said, while Tanya might be incredibly dismayed to learn her country’s leadership was going back on their word and was now thinking about brushing off lightly-strewn-over-with-dirt hatchets, the simple fact of the matter was that she’d seen it happen before, at least in a sense. Schleichel, on the other hand, only knew what was in his own post-war history. So far, that constituted a largely unconcerning upwards trend towards peaceful normalcy and reintegration with Europa. With that in mind, it was obvious what the problem was - the two of them were judging Romel’s behavior by different standards. To Tanya, it was a positive deviation from the norm; to Schleichel, it was the opposite. It was no wonder he felt betrayed to hear his friend was confiding dirty secrets to her that part of him missed the “good old days.” Personally, while Tanya didn’t like it, and she couldn’t strictly sympathize with the desire to see a battlefield ever again, Romel’s comments had to be considered in context. They were no reason to give up and get depressed over her future. First off, as a lieutenant general, the experience had come with far less direct threat of death for Romel. Second, what Tanya could sympathize with was taking a job you hadn’t planned on due to an unforeseen and unwanted series of events. It tended to make one romanticize even the worst bits of the past. “Well, think about it, sir,” Tanya said, trying her hardest at a reassuring smile, forcing her muscles to stretch beyond where they wanted to. “What General Romel says to you could be considered orders. He has to think about the possibility that could be used against him one day. He can speak freely with me knowing I have the option to quit if I don’t like what he’s suggesting. I can’t claim I thought I didn’t have a choice.” Tanya’s smile melted into a more natural one at the thought. Truthfully, it was excellent news to hear that Romel was so circumspect about sharing the barest hint he might enjoy a last shot at field command with anyone who had the power to try to make that happen, up to and including a lifelong friend. In that light, the copious amount of time Romel spent sharing war stories with her in lieu of more productive conversation made perfect sense. Tanya was the sole outlet Romel had for reflecting on a major part of his life. Aside from Mrs. Romel, whom she’d been repeatedly informed was uninterested in hearing about Mr. Romel’s job with the exception of his retirement date. Honestly, Tanya had almost begun to think the reason for it was because she’d done something to make him think she wanted to repeat or endlessly rehash the worst five years of her lives. Schleichel’s face had thankfully shifted into a more neutral expression. He was perched attentively in his seat, and for a moment Tanya felt twenty years younger, sitting in her old Okamura chair, ready to deliver the wishes of the corporation to the lower-ranked employee across from her. Tanya coughed awkwardly into a hand, feeling put on the spot. She wasn’t addressing an unremarkable member of Japan’s professional workforce, but one of the most powerful men in what was up until recently the most powerful army in the world. “What I’m saying is,” Tanya said, pausing to figure out what it was she was saying. “We can’t have it all. So if our choice is between a Chief of Staff that tells everyone in the building he wished he could deliver a parting blow to the Republic and one who realizes there’s a time and a place and a way to do that without it coming back to haunt him…” She paused again to give Schleichel a chance to make a sign of affirmation that he knew what she was getting at. A nod, a yes, right, anything, really. He did nothing of the sort. The politician in him kept him waiting expectantly for her to finish instead of filling in the answer he wanted to hear. “General Romel knows how to separate out what he wants to say as a person from what he knows he has to say as the man in charge,” Tanya summed up, hoping it would clear away any hurt feelings in the friendship. “It’s for the best, I hope you’ll agree.” Schleichel leaned back into his chair, one hand raising up into a fist resting on his lips. “Yes,” he said finally. “Yes, he did say something along those lines earlier today. Shortly before…” He drifted off. His brow furrowed in concentration. Tanya took the same tactic as he had, remaining silent until the other party finished his thought. “Shortly before he said you’d tell me something I needed to hear,” he said quietly, seeming a bit perplexed. “And letting me know if things go wrong, it’ll be on me.” As fast as she could, Tanya put her cup of water to her lips to conceal a grin. Her patience had paid off. The nature of the disagreement between the two friends was growing more obvious, as well as the reason behind the curious flip-flop in Romel’s opinion on how exigent it was to begin preparing to face non-state actors as threats. As a quintessential military mind, Romel of course took such things seriously. The prospect of conflict provided him job security, after all. For his friend, who had a more politic focus, trying to prevent a disaster before the general public knew or cared about it would come across as a gigantic waste of taxpayer money. Thus, Romel’s admonishment to Schleichel if an act of terrorism did create mass casualties: on your head be it. Like all managers, Romel had delegated a task he found unpleasant to someone else. He’d put Tanya in charge of arguing the case for counter-terrorism training to Schleichel so he could escape any more head-butting with a friend. “Talking about this?” she verified, holding up her copy of the document she’d submitted earlier in the day. Schleichel gave a reluctant nod. “And I thought I was supposed to be the politician between the two of us.” “Maybe dealing with it around the office is as much as General Romel can do,” Tanya theorized. “But the ins and outs of the Reichstag get to be too much. Leaders should know their limits.” “Advice you had a hard time taking,” Schleichel shot back. “I hear the rumors are true. Most of them, at least.” There was little Tanya could say to deny the admonishment. Using the Type 95 had pushed her towards foolish extremes at times, it was true. “I guess that’s why I’m not in charge,” she sighed, then turned to humor to gloss over some former bad behavior. “Shockingly, though, I never ate a bite of a single Republican soldier.” She laughed along with Schleichel, recalling a particularly lurid piece from across the border she’d gotten her hands on during the days of international tribunals. Tanya hadn’t known enough of the language to truly digest the article, so to speak. The included “photographic evidence” had painted the picture clearly enough. Happily, the publisher had paid some random blonde Françoise girl to model for the photo, thus making Tanya completely unrecognizable in it. “Do you have any interest?” she asked Schleichel after a moment. “In ever sitting in the big chair here, that is. Not - uhh - Françoise cuisine.” Schleichel heaved a heavy sigh. He stood and faced the window, back to her except for a small glimpse of a troubled profile. “No,” he shook his head. “Not really. I have one boss.” He turned on his heel and paced across the room, turned back and got almost to the window again before picking his train of thought back up. “I have one boss, and he’s a friend. He’d understand if I made a mistake, did something he didn’t like, say…” He glanced over his shoulder at Tanya for a moment, then contemplated the view out the window - mostly open park and trees, with the Reichstag visible to the far right, she’d seen it a thousand times. “Erwin would understand an honest mistake. Once you're in his shoes, though,” Schleichel shook his head another time. “Then you’ve got a couple hundred bosses. And no matter what you do, at least a third of them will hate you. If you’re lucky, you can beg forgiveness for an honest mistake out of another third, and the third in the middle will decide based on what’s best for them. And like you’ve both said, it becomes less about what’s best for you, or what’s best for the country, and more about what’ll get votes for men who’ll never watch your back like you watch theirs.” Largely unnoticed, as far as she could tell, Tanya nodded along. Her sentiments exactly as to why her original designs as a salaryman had ended at a certain point up the corporate chain. Like taxpayers, investors were a pain in the ass to deal with. Smarter to keep a buffer in between you and the people whose money you were spending. It felt nice to be seen, for once. Ambition could be defined as finding the most comfortable place, not the highest. Most people simply failed to comprehend the distinction. “No,” Schleichel repeated emphatically. “No, I’m happy to stay out of the limelight and take care of things on my own. Why, you’d rather I took the job?” Tanya held up her hands in protest. “I’m not saying that,” she assured him. “Not at all. Though I would like to say I think we’re on the same page, sir. If you don’t mind my saying so.” “We are, at that,” Schleichel said, giving a hint of a smile and taking his seat back. “Shame there’s Lehrgen between us, in a way.” Silent, Tanya reminded herself, neither jumping to the defense of the man who’d done everything in his power to help her nor critiquing him where she could. Silence made friends, but no enemies. “He’s a bit old-fashioned, you know?” Schleichel went on. “About the realities of the job.” “I won’t deny that,” Tanya acceded carefully. “But that hasn’t been a bad thing for me.” “Well,” Schleichel smiled. “That’s been true so far, I suppose. You can come to me if you really need something though, you know?” A phantom hand gripped at her throat before she could respond with eager acceptance, and her response came out more hesitant than she’d intended. At first light, the reaction was illogical. An alternative opportunity was there for the taking, with no reason to object aside from feeling indebted to a third party, which she wasn’t. Tanya had never asked Lehrgen to be on her side or suggested there was a quid pro quo involved. The man had done it of his own volition, with no strings attached. After a moment of reflection, her gut instinct began to make more sense - it was precisely the relatively unconditional nature of Lehrgen’s goodwill that was so valuable. Schleichel, on the other hand, was more like her. Predictable, for better and worse. For now, he felt their interests were aligned, and would be perfectly helpful. If and when that changed, Tanya would be out of luck, and fast. Before she could even think about taking the stupid tactic of verbally second-guessing herself, the discussion had at long last moved on to the salient topic: the details of the coming conflicts between nationally-sanctioned agents of violence and rogue actors. Whether they came five years from now or fifty, she knew they were coming. “And you say even an army at full strength could be given a hard time in an occupied territory?” Schleichel asked, after Tanya had revisited her main points. To that, she was able to give an enthusiastic nod, glad that detail hadn’t been lost. While she’d couched her assessments in terms of activity within Imperial borders, where you couldn’t simply go scorched-earth without a second thought, she’d made sure to include an additional warning. As amply evidenced by post-second world war mistakes, without both an overwhelming military presence and strong domestic and international backing favoring occupation of foreign territory - none of which her country had at the moment, and one of which no one on the continent was likely to have for at least another decade when it came to wars close to home - there’d be no uprooting a dedicated insurgency by force alone. Just in case anyone wanted to try solving political divisions at home using the old Roman method of starting popular wars abroad, she’d made it amply clear that without the above factors, doing something rash - reoccupying Polaska, say - would create far more problems than it would alleviate from a domestic standpoint, let alone what the international response might be. She and Schleichel went back and forth for a time, until he was satisfied that he had a good baseline understanding of irregular tactics, though he promised to drop by for further lessons as they were needed. Tanya bade him goodbye with a wave, promptly returning her attention to what she’d been doing when he interrupted. Ideally, she would finish an outline of her department’s capacity metrics by the end of the day. In many ways, as a present she’d like to receive as a boss, she considered it a better birthday gift for Lehrgen than the one she’d dropped off this morning. Though he’d seemed to like that one just fine, too, once he’d gotten over his surprise. 
 
 December 4, 1931Quirinal Palace, Ruma, Kingdom of Ildoa
 
Silvio was a man who knew how to solve problems. How easy it was, now that he was in charge, enthroned in his office of dark wood and Ildoan flags and Ruman eagles, to nationalize his personal issues and clean them up with the help of other people’s time and money. The portrait of himself hanging menacingly in the background was a bit of an odd touch, though. He didn’t like a certain someone? Simple, the next day, neither did anyone else. Signor Manneoni should be pleased with his comfortable exile. Treat others as you want to be treated, after all. He had needed to send away the entire Manneoni family, including Edda, for appearances sake. That hadn’t been easy. She’d been a fun one, came to all the parties willingly, no matter what her father wanted to think. Ah well, soon enough Manneoni would be begging him to take her on as a proper mistress once he found his daughter in bed with a series of local peasants. Until then, Silvio had to put politics over pleasure. His new job wasn’t without its difficulties. Silvio plucked an olive out of a bowl, salt pricking at winter-chapped lips while he nibbled around the pit. Domenico was handing out orders to editors about the next batch of propaganda. At least that’s what Silvio assumed he was doing. He wasn’t really listening. Domenico knew how to handle details like this on his own. Silvio was mostly in the room to frown occasionally and keep the journalists on their toes. It was probably time for a frown again. The expression came easily. Watching how well Domenico worked while Silvio chewed idly on olives, it was almost like watching the better half his wife was supposed to be. Silvio wasn’t complaining about Carla. He certainly wasn’t her better half. Domenico was his best friend, certainly. Maybe not his closest - they hadn’t grown up together and had found themselves on opposing sides of parliamentary matters often enough - but in all the world, there was no one who understood him like Domenico Boroni. Silvio eyed one of the newspapermen who’d run an unflattering story on him years back. He could throw the olive pit at Fellini right now. No one would say a word. He tossed the pit back in the bowl with a small sigh. One day, maybe for money, maybe for love, maybe because Silvio’s power had to got to his head and he threw an olive pit at someone Domenico liked, one day Domenico would cross him. Not obviously. He wouldn’t take a public stance against Silvio. He’d just do something that made the general public take a stance against their beloved leader. Domenico understood him. He understood Domenico. It was exactly what Silvio would do in Domenico’s shoes, hell, maybe only for fun, to see if he could get away with it, see what havoc he could cause by whispering one of the many secrets shared between them into another ear. For example, that Silvio had no intention of restoring any part of historic Ildoan territory to the fold. People wouldn’t like it if they found out about that. It was a terrible thing to have ruin such a perfect friendship, an inclination for self-service. Who wouldn’t want to forgive such a natural weakness in their fellow man? Domenico’s wily plots were the entire reason Silvio had hired the man to get him into power. His loyalty being so openly purchasable was one of his better qualities. It meant he was predictable. Silvio plucked another olive out of his bowl, smiling this time, probably perplexing all the editors taking their notes. Tomorrow morning, he’d get a kick of delight out of seeing what they thought he was smiling about. It would be the centerpiece of the front page. Even better if they all guessed differently. He’d go to each individually, tell them they’d been wrong and someone else got it right, but he was a forgiving man, so they’d be forgiven. This time. Silvio was, indeed, a forgiving man. It wasn’t a lie. Here he was planning on how to forgive Domenico by also forgiving some more of his supposed enemies. The Pope himself couldn’t set a better example of their Lord and Savior. Silvio knew how to solve his problems. And his country’s. How the latter had so consistently eluded his predecessors he wasn’t sure. The answer was obvious. Probably, the men in charge before him had tried to solve problems with solutions, like you got taught in school. That was of no good to anyone. You solved one problem for someone and what happened? They started complaining about another, that’s what. What did everyone else think humans were, complex math equations? Politically, it was pointless to solve problems with solutions, that only got you, personally, more problems handed to you. You solved problems by making more problems, but for other people, not for you. Silvio had a problem - Domenico was going to do something that threatened his popular support. He knew this. So when it happened, and people started demanding answers, all he had to throw them was a juicier problem to sink their teeth into. And that brought Silvio to his second problem - what to do with all the damn communists he was locking up. Some of them might not be communists, either. A lot of them, maybe. What could you do? People were feeling enthusiastic these days. When you didn’t have much else going for you in life, accusing random neighbors in your tenement block of communism must feel a great deal of fun. Silvio said the communists were his enemies. They weren’t. He liked the poor bastards, actually. They’d been a staunch electoral ally, in their own way. He wouldn’t be here without them. A second olive pit landed with a plop of oil in the bowl. Silvio pulled over the black-skinned grapes lying just out of easy reach. Something sweet fit his mood better. He didn’t want to kill all the communists, or torture them, or lock them up for life if they were lucky, or whatever else he might have said in a moment of passion. Except he couldn’t exactly just release them back. Into his own population, that was. Recently, Silvio had been playing a little game when he was bored. People had begun to mysteriously disappear from their jail cells, beginning with the most ardent of his Stalynists. The Drotskyists he made sure to rendition separately. Those people would fill each other with bullets faster than Silvio’s own supporters would shoot either of them. Well, he knew what people assumed was happening to the missing prisoners. He’d had to hold his nose and order a couple “secret” firing squad executions to sell the story. And he did make other prisoners dig an awful lot of graves. No one really bothered to check there was a body in there once you’d put the dirt back. The prisoners presumably thought digging and refilling was some kind of Sisyphean punishment. Those who didn’t believe that believed the communists were as dangerous and all-powerful as Silvio claimed in his speeches, capable of pulling off impossibly daring rescue heists right under his nose. The second theory was closer to the truth. Those men were conveniently disappearing to become someone else’s problem, one day, when Silvio needed them to be. First, he’d hand-selected some true believers in his cause. A whole lot of trouble, that type usually was, unless you found a way to make use of their cult-like ways and offered them a more secretive level of membership in your imaginary club. His ardent supporters, Silvio’s Secret Service, he called them, known only to him, not to Domenico, would guard the jail on select nights. Two or three would “sneak” in and unlock some lucky prisoners, sneak them out, clean them up, hand them a new identity, some cash, and a change of clothes, compliments of their preferred branch of the communist party. Silvio told his sycophants the plan was to send them all off to Unredeemed Ildoa, and shortly, soon, always soon without saying when, they would cause a revolution there and Ildoa could go march in to save their Slovanian brethren, since Ostria would be too weak to sort it out themselves. Silvio let someone else handle the transport out of the country, some old administrative worker who had no idea what she was arranging travel for, she sent them everywhere besides Unredeemed Ildoa. Imagine if they actually caused a revolution there and Silvio had to do something about it. In the grand scheme of things, the Slovanian part of Ildoa’s historic lands was small potatoes, which made it possible to really destabilize it when all he wanted to do was threaten to destabilize it. America, the Commonwealth, the Empire, the Republic, old Rachele could send the Drotskyists to the Federation for all he cared, all places big enough to scare and not big enough to fall. What mattered was the men and women he was gifting to these places believed they owed their lives to The Party. They’d been told that one day, The Party was going to call that favor in, and it would be their turn to save it. Most of them were reported to be rather excited about the future mission. In a way, their orders were truthful. Silvio had saved them from himself, and when the time came, they’d save him. Suddenly, whatever domestic squabble Domenico had embroiled them in would be forgotten as Ildoa, and the rest of the world along with it, turned its eyes to other news. Would it be blowing up buildings? Assassinating politicians? Sabotaging factories? Silvio didn’t know and didn’t care, as long as his communist friends were sowing as much destruction as they could on foreign soil. He’d leave it up to them to figure out how to be the most useful according to their individual circumstances. He couldn’t wait to see how they were going to surprise him. If he was lucky, he could time it to fall around his birthday. He planned on putting on his most atrocious Rus accent and making as many calls as he could himself. Glancing at Domenico across the room, smug smile on the man’s deep-jowled face, suspicious dark eyes small and beady as they hid behind a layer of fat, Silvio grinned again, behind his napkin this time. It wouldn’t do to confuse his journalists too much. What a day it would be, holding court at his evening birthday fête when the news began coming in. Some runners would go to him, others to Domenico, and Silvio would get to see which of the men around didn’t belong to him. Then Domenico’s eyes would open in surprise and his smile would turn to appreciation at the masterful stroke. Like long-time lovers they’d know when to catch eyes and Domenico would raise his glass in a silent toast only Silvio could understand the meaning of - I concede, you’ve outdone yourself this time. Friendship didn’t get any better than that. 




 

 You make me nervous so I really can't eat






 
 "I am so clever that sometimes I don't understand a single word of what I am saying."
 
 
 
 December 7, 1931Outside Luijin, Chianzi, The Middle Kingdom
 
It wasn’t cold, for winter, it wasn’t cold at all. Brisk, maybe. It was five degrees warmer than Berun, easy, probably closer to ten. Hans von Zettour surveyed the flat plain surrounding him, starting with the ground beneath his feet. Mud. From the knees of his trousers and splattering black boots, mud. There was mud climbing up the edges on the tents in the encampment he’d attached himself to, mud on the tables of what counted as the officer’s mess, mud where you expected it, down in the valley cut by some river or other - he hadn’t bothered to learn its name - along with everywhere you didn’t expect it. It had slowed his mail down to a crawl. Or perhaps news was the better word. He got the news along with everyone else, but bearded and bedraggled as he was, with only the quality of his boots to give him away if you could tell beneath the damnable mud, he was a far cry from the days he looked the part of an Imperial officer. There were no letters for Hans von Zettour coming to a place he officially wasn’t. On the whole, he rather doubted anyone besides the Federation would be bothered by a formal appearance of his personage out there in the back end of nowhere, trying to pin down the Middle Kingdom’s communist revolutionaries. Nonetheless, unkempt - and dare he say unwashed - as he was, he looked more at risk of being a communist plant in the camp than an Imperial one. “Herr Ge-Gerber?” Zettour heard. The alternating slurp and splat of boots in the mud heralded the approach of a junior student. “The commander’s ready to be interviewed.” The black-gray wires of Zettour’s beard scratched at the wind-chapped skin of his neck when he nodded. His disguise was a professor leading a living-history observation course of the Middle Kingdom’s civil war. He and his student body, the would-be War College candidates, were going to have an interview with the Kingdom’s general in charge of the coming offensive, alright. One in which Zettour, and his students, were interviewed for their expertise on the subject. That damned pretend American was squinting at Zettour when he turned to leave, he was sure. Zettour might have to arrange an accident for him. It wouldn’t be the first almost-tattletale he’d done it for. He always hoped it would be the last, somewhere in the back of his mind. The forefront knew it wouldn’t be. The things he did for his damned country. It got easier, once you got the hang of it. He’d long ago lost the illusion he hadn’t killed anyone, bloodless as his hands had remained. Once he’d reminded himself of that, ordering it around a bit more directly had come almost naturally. Zettour wondered, sometimes, if his wife knew. Probably. Probably she knew for a fact, and that’s why they got on so well in their old age, spending more time together than they had since their honeymoon. His soul was more of a lost cause than their country. Nothing worth fighting over, that was for certain. So she didn’t. That’s what Erwin’s problem was, now that he thought about it. Zettour would tell him next time they saw each other. Lucy must have still seen something in there worth saving. 
 xXx 
It was him. It had to be him. If it looked like the former General von Zettour, in a sort of down-on-his-luck way, got the same wily look in his eyes the old snake was known for, and lifelong academics probably didn’t, and came perilously close to being addressed as Herr General, the way lifelong academics definitely didn’t, it almost had to be General von Zettour. At least, that’s what one American journalist, who was neither American nor a journalist, concluded. Mr. John Cassidy - on top of American, he had to pretend to be fucking Irish - unstuck feet sunk into the muck in a tract of Earth that no one aside from the Qinese had any business standing on, and he said that as a loyal Albishman devoted to expanding the King’s dominion over mankind. His walk to his tent was punctuated by a kind of organic flatulence that reminded him of his least favorite uncle. Went to Hindustan and came back a vegetarian. A disgrace to Albish men everywhere. Given Mr. John’s track record with the weather, he was going to assume he’d one day find himself assigned to his purported hometown of Bostun. That would be the day he committed so fully to his disguise he punched an Ildoan off a barstool. Getting picked up by law enforcement under a false identity tended to make it unusable. It would be satisfying, too, after what the Ildoans had gotten up to lately. John had half a mind to go to Ruma as himself, a respected member of the Commonwealth’s intelligence service, because maybe that would make Signore Berluscone listen to him, and the newly “elected” leader would stop fumbling the ball so badly that all those communists he went on about killing had time to escape and end up in places like Londinium. They could at least have the grace to go to Namchester. Or anywhere Mr. John’s bosses wouldn’t care too much. The sound of a light drizzle piddled its tune out on the top of his tent. Just what he needed. Nature was pissing on him, too. Zettour’s presence there didn’t complicate things so much as it gave them the opportunity to uncomplicate things, if, indeed, the man was who John suspected. All this business with pretending not to notice was getting tiresome. One day, a line would get crossed, the Albish would have to say something, and some Grand Inquest would occur as to why nobody had mentioned all the minor violations the Empire was accruing against its promises, like keeping men and weapons out there in the middle of nowhere. Twelve of the thirteen names on the inquest would tie back to him. John would have to move to Bostun as John Cassidy permanently, then, and never look back. That future had to be prevented at all costs. Now that Zettour and his ilk had been out of public life long enough, most of the world’s powers might be able to stomach sitting down at a table together to get everything aboveboard. Once the rules were no longer unreasonable, the Imperials wouldn’t look so damned reasonable every time they skipped around them, nor would they be so damned stubborn about following the ones they weren’t keen on testing. It was a mad world out there when you suspected Imperials of acting reasonably. On occasion. A conversation with Zettour and without pretensions, out there where no one could see John pal around with the second-most vilified member of the former Imperial Army, it would be a way to let Zettour know John knew, and they might get to working on unsticking themselves from more than the literal muck they were mired in. If it wasn’t Zettour, though. That was the rub. You couldn’t just let some random communist-sympathizing-looking professor in on your secrets. John flopped down onto a cushion of too-few feathers. He had bigger problems. The Federation was up to something even further into the middle reaches of nowhere. John’s compatriots were picking up the magic residue of it on the equipment some staunch tsarist had snuck out to Sildberia. Off to worse weather, Mr. John was. When the time came, he was going to throw out returning a colony on the Southern Continent to the Empire. Did they deserve it? No. Did he? Most certainly. Maybe then he’d get to follow people around somewhere sunny. 
 xXx 
Formerly crisp-pressed red banners drooping with the weight of the water that had soaked and dyed their bright colors into something closer to the color of arterial blood lined Mikel Tukhachevsky’s walk out to his observation post. Tired of red as he was, brown, by now, had it beat. Leafless trees and overturned ground, homes and tents, his clothes, his hands, all part of a muted palette as lifeless as the eyes that had stared back at him in the reflection of a frozen stream a few years into his interminable sentence as a political prisoner. He missed the white of Moskva this time of year. Hell, he’d start missing Sildberia at this rate. Mikel drew out his binoculars. Through the swipe mark left by a cloth neither clean nor dry, he could make out a man that cut a familiar figure across the open plain. Back too straight, self-assured in march and mannerisms, the man was no mere Europaen observer. Imperial, he was, Mikel would be his life on it. Figuratively, that was. Figuratively, he’d be his life on it. A sending of the Imperial Army who wasn’t supposed to be there, but Mikel didn’t care so long as it wasn’t that one mage. Up against her, he wasn’t betting his life, he was losing it. Risking his life had lost its luster once the future began looking brighter. The world’s future? The country’s? Who knew, who cared. The Tukhachevsky family? They finally had a friend on the inside. Piatokov was a communist, he had to remember that. Mikel’s differences with him remained philosophical. He wasn’t so bad, for a communist. These days, only a communist could protect you. Piatokov had lost his own erstwhile attitude for risking his life by saying stupid things, unsurprisingly. He hadn’t come off as a man used to avoidable hardship. The brown wasn’t so bad, all things considered. It was better than what Piatokov had gotten him switched out of. They all knew the Imperials had figured a way to get dual-core orbs working. No one’d been lucky enough to get their hands on a less-than-halfway destroyed version, so as of yet the technology hadn’t been reproduced. Not for lack of trying. So far, the Federation’s experiments hadn’t yielded much, with the exception of the knowledge that a second core didn’t double the explosive power of an orb’s output when you pushed it over its limits, it increased it exponentially. Set it up wrong - or right, as it were - and Mikel was uncomfortably close to reliving one of his final battles. Doubtless, every other country had learned the same lesson. What Mikel did doubt was that any other country hated their mages so much they’d risk losing the less-than-politically correct ones on cheap suicide missions. Mikel heaved a sigh, struggling to light a cigarette in the damp. He’d know Piatokov was more than a misguided hope the day the man got enough power to free Mikel’s family from the compound. Until then, Mikel’d keep mouthing the lies that covered him in so much muck. Literally, as today would have it. 
 
 December 12, 1931Christ Church, Imperial Capital Berun
 
Built in 1863, the same year Preussland and Bevaria had melded themselves into the beginnings of the future Imperial state, Christ Church had blessed no Teutonic knights, hosted no Emperors, seated no Chancellors. Its spires didn’t tower over the neighborhood, its stained glass evoked no gasps or stares, the doors opened silently with a simple push, no groaning resistance of hulking, heavy wood to make supplicants earn their way into Heaven. Had a damned fine organ, though. One of the original parishioners had been the head of the cutlers guild back when those things still existed, and had gifted all his money to the church upon his death. Sixty years, and its pipes still rang out clear and true, low notes bellowing out powerful enough to shake you in your pew, high ones singing in a soft sigh that made you want to collapse into it instead. You’d be hard-pressed to find a better one in all of Europa. A little plain, yes, with none of the grand history of the continent’s great churches, but good, solid bones, well-engineered and perfectly functional, with a passionate heart that belied its exterior. A more perfect allegory for the people it served could hardly be found. And in need of more than a few repairs, Kurt von Schleichel sighed to himself. He glanced around and noted what he would do, had the house belonged to him and not God. Anything to distract him from the unfamiliar discomfort of the hard pew beneath him. Not every part could be perfectly engineered. They were only human. Plus, they probably weren’t supposed to get relaxed in God’s presence, or something. It had been a while since he’d been to church. Last Christmas…? he ruminated, one eye squinting mostly shut in search of the answer. No, it had been the year before. He’d worked most of last Christmas. His wife wasn’t likely to let him get away with that again. Not unless he wanted to face a Lisbeth-Lucy alliance. Fucking Lucy. She’d corrupted Lisbeth. The Republic and the Federation, if you would. One of the two he could defeat in battle so long as she didn’t get a cheap shot off. The other had lurked menacingly in the background of his life since age twenty-five, and he’d do anything to get rid of it and get his old friend - or country - back. Erwin had been up for anything before he got tied down. Blood rushed to numbed nerves as soon as Kurt shot up, making his shuffle out of his seat a dance through hot coals alternated with icy pricks. It had been a stupid idea, coming to church, hoping for an epiphany. Unpatriotic, really. What was he, an Ildoan that believed in apparitions of the Virgin Mary? Only, he’d thought it might be possible. That God - or a representative, he wasn’t choosy - would appear to him and give him the same righteous conviction to do his duty that infected every sentence, every word, every damned syllable of Degurechaff’s pronouncements. A taste of what He’d given Her, that was all Kurt asked for himself. Woodsmoke thickened the air, and when he turned, a line of leaping red and yellow burned its way down the nave towards the altar. Nothing more than the dying light of sunset, on second thought, illuminating the gold paint of the architectural flourishes as it sent its beams shooting through the western windows. Nothing more than the sun setting and a nearby home putting a new log on the fireplace. The polished sheen of his boots refracted still more light when he stepped them into the aisle to head for the doors, black as his thoughts, which waded with the same steadiness towards eternal damnation. Had Degurechaff really suggested what he thought she’d suggested? That, almost certainly, was a yes. Had Erwin really suggested seeing her for the purpose of hearing her suggestions? That, that was the key. Asking was useless. Erwin would deny explicitly ordering more than a half-hearted rearmament either way - because he didn’t, or because he didn’t want to officially know about it. Asking Erwin was as useless as asking God for a sign. And yet here he was, pathetic enough to try asking both. The noise of the street, tram bells and church bells and men whistling at women and police whistling at the men, the roar of a plane engine above and subway below, and chatter, endless chatter, most in Germanian, some not, invaded his ears as soon as the doors opened. Fucking marvel of sound engineering, those doors were, separating heavenly order from the full force of humanity’s chaos. He knew what some of the chatter would say about him. It was his job to know. Kurt von Schleichel, out for revenge after losing in Stalyngrad. Kurt von Schleichel, naively believing Romel could pull off anything, and if not him, Degurechaff. Kurt von Schleichel, hallucinated holy fire in the light of the dying sun over the Empire, instead of simply seeing death. It wasn’t true, none of it. He knew all too well how futile a war on public opinion would be, so he didn’t bother correcting it. The same people would be on his side regardless, and the less logic he attempted to convince them with, the more they’d trust him. One day and one way, the Federation was going to spread west. Try, at least. His country could fight it or forfeit to it. He wasn’t fooling himself and thinking the rest of Europa would do anything other than turn on the Empire as soon as that fight was won, if they were given the tools to try to win it. And they couldn’t fight all of Europa, he understood that well enough, too. That had been made more than clear. Negotiate as beggars or negotiate from a position of relative power. Those were the choices left to them. They’d missed the opportunity to do the latter five years ago. Five years, ten years, fifteen years from now, it would come again. He wasn’t keen on missing it this time around, that was all. It wasn’t so insane to think Erwin saw it the same way, no matter how well he toed the party line out loud. Why else pull Degurechaff up for private meetings? The short walk down Königgrätzer Strasse was punctuated by the sky crying out a few last drops of the afternoon rain. Suffused with warmth and the light of old oil lamps dimmed by dirt, Löwe Rein was the type of establishment he and Erwin were supposed to have grown out of. Most patrons were young enough to almost be their grandsons, too young to have lost the last war. It was them that would decide whether they won or lost the next. Terrifying, that. They looked exactly responsible enough to be in charge of a losing, yet heroic, raid on the nearest brothel. And somehow, they looked exactly as responsible as he and Erwin surely had forty-odd years ago. The unguarded grin on his friend’s face as he sat at the bar gazing with slightly too much fondness into a half-full glass of Pilsner - Erwin was very punctual to appointments where the agenda consisted of a drink list, and habitually a second away from being late to all others - hadn’t been missing forty years. Four, maybe. “Not a single person in here knows who you are, hmm?” Kurt guessed, taking up the seat next to him. “Hmm?” Erwin responded in kind, head jerking up and smile turning into a dry laugh. “No. Just some crazy old guy.” He turned inwards towards Kurt, glass in hand, pointing at it with dead seriousness. “When’s the last time you saw beer this cheap?” he asked, disbelief lending breath behind the usually flat tone. “Can’t say I’ve been out looking,” Kurt replied, before addressing himself to the bartender to order the same. A few minutes of comfortable silence - if it could be called that with the background noise - descended on them. One beer down and no doubt plenty to go, Erwin shook himself out of whatever thoughts he was lost in, forcing Kurt to reluctantly do the same. Not that he cared what the ultimate answer was to the total value of bottles behind the bar. He’d lost track of what he’d already counted anyway, half and quarter-full bottles indistinguishable besides the color of their contents. It had simply been an easier calculation to attempt than the coming one. “What’s this about, anyway?” Erwin asked. “Two old friends can’t go out for a drink?” Erwin’s eyes darted around the room. “Not sure this is a place for old friends.” “Can you believe it’s going to be them one day in our shoes?” “Let’s see…” Erwin grinned. This time, his eyes swept critically over the crowd. His chin jerked to a boy finishing a round of darts, red and black wings visible when he flourished his hands and bowed. “That one’s you.” Medium-brown mop of hair in contrast to Kurt’s, dark and neatly trimmed, olive skin like he had some blood from outside the Empire, Hellenic maybe, more pretty than handsome, though Kurt had never been much of either, the two shared nothing identifiable in common besides one thing. “I’m flattered,” Kurt sniffed, the laugh no longer forced after all these years of telling himself to get over it. “He’s definitely taller than I was at that age. And I think I’m going the other direction now. He’ll have me beat soon enough.” “Probably true, that, but-” “It’s funny, you know,” Kurt sighed, then tipped his head to finish his drink, feeling a smile tug at his lips after he wiped them off. “When that’s what a newspaper tries to throw at me. I mean, really. That’s the best you can do?” “No, it’s because he hasn’t wiped the smug fucking smirk off his face the whole time we’ve been here,” Erwin objected. “Can’t blame him,” Kurt laughed, beckoning for another beer, watching his younger self collecting banknotes. “I think he just hustled enough cash out of everyone to pay his bar tab for the next month.” “It’s true what they say, I’m convinced,” Erwin muttered darkly into the bottom of his own glass. “About you short shits being closer to hell.” “Which one’s you, then?” Kurt asked, feeling a smug fucking smirk of his own threaten. “That one,” Erwin said, with a vague gesture towards the center of the youngest group of boys. “He’s already the boss. They’re all listening to him.” “First off, no one listened to you back then,” Kurt reminded him. “Second, I bet that’s just because he’s the first to get a girlfriend, so the rest think he’s pretty much got it all figured.” “Well, if we want to start making unfounded conjectures about everyone here-” “All I’m saying is I think we’re seeing more of a Sauer-in-training than anyone else. Look at him. There’s clearly a closer resemblance to one of you than the other.” Erwin’s attention shot across the room to the boy in question once again, tense with the kind of rivalry men their age didn’t tend to have with their office’s female-attention magnet. As though the anger physically manifested a heat target on his chest, by some sixth sense he caught the malice emanating towards him, looked up to find the source, backed up an intimidated step, then turned to put one of his companions into the line of fire. “What?” Kurt laughed. “Lucy have a thing for Sauer?” “I fucking wish,” Erwin grunted, swallowing the worst of his mood along with a third of his glass and letting the tightness out of his jaw. “Anyway, she’d eat him alive and have room for dessert.” “Then what’s the poor kid ever done to you? I kinda like having him around. Bit of a useful idiot, you know?” “He’s as good as you are at playing people, and twice as good at pretending he isn’t,” Erwin huffed, finger pointing accusatorily in Kurt’s direction. “People who are women under forty,” Kurt tsked. “That’s like saying Degurechaff could do your job because she’s as good at on-the-ground tactics and twice as good at making people underestimate her.” At that, Erwin’s humor over the cheap beer and lack of hangers-on returned in full force, head tossed back to laugh and eyes closed, dim yellow light lending color to short shoots of silver hair and making him look half his age. “Can you imagine?” “A generation from now with the two of them where we are? Thank God we won't be alive to see that shitshow.” Erwin’s hand slapped the bar a few times. “Him wondering how it’s supposed to count as a promotion that he’s now mostly seducing money-grubbing old men,” he got out between breaths. “Her, I mean, let’s see her try to plan what’s next when she’s living with someone who can hold every single fucking word she’s ever said against her and manufacture a war crime-level offense out of her coming home late like they weren’t perfectly aware of who they were marrying in the first place. She’ll finally get that endless battle urge satisfied, I guess.” Erwin’s eyes twinkled with the innocent humor of consigning someone else to enforced sympathy with his own struggle. Kurt’s eyes shot to the side and down, knowing they had a less innocent kind of mischief dancing in them. He couldn’t prevent his head from making a momentary dip while a half-cough of laughter escaped his throat. He did keep the name to himself. Few things ruined a good joke like taking it too far. They’d known each other long enough that the instant Erwin caught his eye, a sort of telepathy sent Kurt’s thoughts his way. Immediately, the other man’s dry chuckle turned into unstoppable heaves of breathlessness, punctuated by a low refrain of what in most anyone else would have been called giggles. A hand went to cover his mouth in a futile attempt to take control of himself, shoulders beginning to shake with suppressed laughter. “Fu-u-u-ck,” he finally got out. His hand moved from his mouth to cover his eyes. “God dammit.” It took another minute of struggle before he said anything more. “Fuck,” he repeated. “I hate you. After all the work I put in not to give anyone something to blackmail me with, all that, and now you’ve got me in goddamn tears in front of these dumb assholes.” With a self-pitying shake of his head and an arm flung out dramatically to sweep across the variety of uninterested non-spectators populating the bar, a great, heavy sigh and last chuckle, Erwin went back to the task of finishing his third beer. That sounded as close as Kurt was going to get to an introduction for broaching his question. In the span of a second, his brief reprieve from several weeks of internal debate was over. “About Degurechaff…” he began, spinning his glass in his hands, unable to drink. “What’s her…purpose?” Oblivious to the sudden seriousness, Erwin laughed again, this time his usual snort of disbelief. “Didn’t realize I was God now.” “You know what I mean.” Erwin’s own demeanor drifted towards contemplative, torso turned to face the bar and not Kurt, an elbow plunked on the counter and chin resting on his palm, eyes searching for answers among the rows of bottles while he let out a noncommittal hum. “First off, I like her, in a certain kind of way. She’s like…like an electrical current.” “Don’t start on analogies. You’re terrible at them.” Erwin glanced sideways with an annoyed squint. That invariably meant he was going to do the opposite of what you wanted. “Shocking and possibly deadly to get too close to,” he said, wolfish grin on his face. “But she knows things no one else does. Sees things no one else does.” Before Kurt could reiterate his friend’s failure at drawing parallels, Erwin interrupted to correct himself. “She makes it so you can see, too,” he said, giving a sharp nod and leaning back to cross his arms over his chest. “I’m great at analogies,” he added, after a moment. They both fell silent for half a minute, Kurt trying to phrase the question of what path it was she’d shown their commander, Erwin thinking of God knew what. Asking Degurechaff’s advice about Lucy, probably. “She does know things, Kurt,” he repeated, atypically quiet, more a reassurance than anything. “Sometimes she just really fucking gets it. I know she’s practically as dangerous as the Federation if she goes off wrong, but I don’t think she will. She’s too predictable.” “Predictable?” Kurt spluttered, coughing on the dregs of his drink. Half because it was the opposite of everything else said about her, half because if Erwin found her predictable, in all probability Kurt really did have his marching orders from her mouth. “As long as you manage it right,” Erwin clarified. “You can’t even think about telling her how to do what you want her to do. She basically ignores it if she disagrees and who knows where that ends up. You tell her the result you want, though, that’s where you have to be clear, and she’ll get you there on the express train. Now, I don’t know she cares too much what condition the train’s in when it arrives so she’ll hit what she has to, but only what she really can’t avoid.” “Trains either stop or go, they can’t avoid-” “Just pretend.” “Okay,” Kurt nodded, glib smile left undisguised. “I’ll pretend your analogy works.” “She can do magic, actually, so could levitate the train for a bit to go over things, so. It does work.” As recompense for the creative rejoinder, Kurt pulled the bills out to pay for the next few rounds and smacked them down on the counter. He had a much higher tolerance for losing battles than Erwin. “Now, the habit’s one thing in war,” Erwin rambled on. “Other times you’ve got a bunch of golden calves that need worshiping, and she’ll just…” Erwin paused for a moment for a humorless chuckle to himself. “You ever hear like, when she got the Arene orders she actually made poor Volkenhein say the unmentionable out loud instead of playing along and giving a mutual nod of understanding after some meaningful eye contact and hints?” “Who hasn’t?” “She has all the subtlety of a steam whistle,” Erwin sighed indulgently. “It’s not so much of a problem when all she can do is talk. Soon enough I’ll have to teach her how to walk a tighter line.” Erwin yawned, leaning back further in his seat. “Or maybe you can,” he finished. “You’re better at that kind of thing anyway. The point is, I’m not saying there’s nothing wrong with her approach, but the problems don’t change. You let her light up the scene, you keep in mind the fastest way isn’t always the best way, and that her final stop isn’t at the same station - might not even exist - and there you go. Predictable as the Imperial train schedule. Mostly.” In the history of the word, there was unlikely to have been a more consequential use of mostly. The ship is seaworthy, mostly. Your wife is alive, mostly. A dangerous military asset is under control, mostly. Who said that? “Mostly?” Erwin shook his head again, this time less indulgently. “What do you think Erich is giving her that keeps her so…so calm most of the time? I’m not going to complain that much, I’m just kind of at a loss here. I mean, I assume if we ever really need the less calm version again the bloodlust comes first, right? There’s just not much else to do right now is all. Tell me that’s true.” That might be the closest Kurt would get to a definitive answer. “Do you want it to be true?” Off and to the left Erwin’s eyes went, glaring at some mental image, beer held halfway between counter and chin, before his attention returned to the world around him and his chin tipped back to quaff half of his drink. The glass clunked down with a knock audible over the terrible excuse for music that passed these days. “That fucking…guy,” was all he grumbled out before retreating into recalcitrant silence. The grave insult would have passed unnoticed to anyone that didn’t know Erwin so well, who didn’t know that fucking asshole, that fucking dickhead, and that fucking fuck were his typical terms for referring to anything from mildly inconvenient people to his best friends, that that fucking guy had so far been reserved for Jürgen Schulz, Lucy’s other boyfriend. Thirty-five years ago. The competition had been what inspired the proposal, Kurt was positive. “Well, the only drug I ever heard Erich got his hands on isn’t known for calming you down, so it’s probably just Degurechaff doesn’t have much to be uncalm about these days,” Kurt laughed. “Is it him and Lucy, then?” “It’s…just…” Erwin’s hand rose off the bar so he could mime choking someone. “Motherfucking Sauer. Their goddamn unholy little game.” Kurt stared at Erwin like he had no idea what he was on about. Because he didn’t. “You like him because he’s so damn concerned about smoothing things over he comes in your office like an innocent little lamb who doesn’t want a fight so he tells you what should be the secret of what Erich is going to try to put his foot down on and get stubborn about, because Sauer’s so worried that his boss is going to have a falling out with the bigger bosses, and you figure he’s either a total idiot, or he’s looking out for himself if there really is a big fight?” “That’s…yes.” “So, I’m a terrible person.” “Also yes.” “And I get to thinking, one way or another, something’s going on between the two of them I won’t approve of.” “Yeah, since both of them definitely seem the type,” Kurt rolled his eyes. “A few weeks back, I pretend to run into one of his guys. I test him out a little. Now this Wechter, he’s a solid one. When I say I have a question about some personnel issues in the department, I get back that attitude that I couldn’t torture the answer out of him. I was real proud we still have men like that around, honestly. Just loyal to your next-in-command like he’s your feudal lord. The way it used to be before Degurechaff got a damn piece of international legislation written for her telling people they should disobey over their fuckin’ feelings. Who the hell can run an army like that?” To the rhetorical question, Kurt only shrugged. And ordered another beer. “So anyway, I tell Wechter I’m not trying to get anyone in trouble, but Sauer’s been a first lieutenant a bit too long now, and I’m making sure our friend General von Lehrgen isn’t holding him back, that’s all.” Erwin gratefully gulped down most of the fresh glass he was handed. Kurt was going to count grabbing it from the bartender as soon as it got in reach as having it handed to him. “Wechter kind of relaxes, says some shit he shouldn’t, which is precisely why I scared him over what the conversation was about to begin with. Kind of implies maybe the kid deserves to be transferred. To have his ass kicked by someone willing to do it, presumably.” Erwin set his drink down to give his lifelong tell he was properly buzzed, drawing his hands down over his face and then giving both cheeks a sharp slap at the end, something halfway between a shudder and a shake of his head the finishing motion. “And he tells this fucking hilarious story, honestly. Apparently when Erich first put his foot down about Sauer’s extracurricular hobbies, Ernst turns right around and tells him he’ll stop once, you know, the number with a roof over his head is higher than the tent-and-field number, it’s a matter of pride is what it is.” Erwin laughed from deep down in his gut, a sure sign he envied whatever misbehavior was about to be described. “The balls on this kid, he starts submitting ‘After Action Reports’ on his progress, which one can imagine-,” Erwin’s voice cuts off to shake once again with uncontrolled glee at the thought. “I know they’ve all been put in a fireplace by now, but what I wouldn’t give to get my hands on one of those,” he said, during his short recovery before relapsing into undignified heaves of laughter. He brought himself back to the conversation with two deep inhales and a last happy sigh. “That must have been after he knew his real value as an adjutant,” Erwin said. “According to Erich according to Wechter, Erich lets slip that Sauer is both so blind about how charmed his life is and so good at reading people it can be impossible to draw the line between the two, and when it comes to not realizing how obnoxious talking about his deal with women is going to sound, you have to give him the benefit of the doubt, so…” “So?” “So have you ever noticed we’re all just giving him the benefit of the damn doubt? That he isn’t doing it intentionally?” Kurt raised his drink and squinted, trying to figure out what being intentionally airheaded got anyone. “I didn’t notice right after Wechter said it either,” Erwin agreed. “Took until the next time I had to have it out a bit with Erich and like usual I’m thinking I’ve won a bit too easily. The other Kurt wouldn’t give up like that, back when he was in the job. From what I’ve heard, he’d probably take a swing at me for some of the shit I’ve said. I like winning but part of me’s going all - man up. Fight back some more. You’re a fuckin’ soldier for God’s sake. He’s spent enough time with that scary-ass bitch-” Kurt choked on his drink. “I heard that was almost her official title instead of Argent,” he coughed out, pounding on his chest. “I’m talking about Tahnoff,” Erwin tutted. “Degurechaff’s dangerous. She isn’t scary.” With a click of his tongue, Erwin turned and grumbled into his beer for a moment, head shaking in disappointment at the mixup. “Anyhow, then I start getting like, man, it must have sucked growing up stuck way out east being terrorized by her. Messed up for life territory. Half the anger at Degurechaff might be built up resentment, you know? Did you hear Hugenburg called her a communist whore to her face once and she didn’t so much as break stride, just said she was as disappointed as he was the Nationalists didn’t measure up? And if you’ve been with him at the shower you know how that must have landed. She’s got to know it too. I figured Erich must have told-” “So you got lost in your head while making someone with a job sit there and watch. Classic.” “I like listening to myself more than other people,” Erwin groused. “What is that, a sin?” “Pretty sure pride is-” “Right, well, I was getting to the part where this makes me go - wait a second. There are positions soldiers aren’t supposed to defend to the death. Like false ones they’ve telegraphed to the enemy to draw fire. How did I miss that shit? Me?” While Erwin first pointed accusingly at himself and then switched to shaking his beer like he was back to choking something, Kurt attempted to puzzle out how Erwin’s mind had gotten from Hugenburg to Sauer. He gave up promptly. Cheap as the beer was, he wasn’t sure he could afford enough to make sense of his friend’s frenetic leaps of logic. “The worst part is I still can’t tell if I’m being paranoid,” Erwin huffed. “Only when I think about the times it’s happened and the concessions I’ve been too happy to give away feeling like I’d won, Sauer’s oversharing does seem a little too convenient. Pisses me the fuck off.” Kurt snorted into his glass. He glanced at Erwin out of the side of his eyes. For all his grouchiness, he’d never lost a certain boyish naivete. “Did you think Hans gave Erich the job because he was an idiot? You’re going to get all heartbroken he isn’t?“No, I’m heartbroken Sauer’s not as nice as I thought. Now I can’t let him have Lucy. I’m not just going to give her to the next asshole.” Kurt’s eyes moved back to stare directly ahead so they could close while he shook his head over Erwin’s stubborn inability not to rise to a challenge. “Fucking Hans,” Erwin sighed, finding a new person to complain about. “I can’t stand when people think they’re smarter than they are.” “You can’t stand people who think they’re smarter than you,” Kurt corrected. “Same difference. I appreciate Erich knows what he’s doing. I don’t appreciate the calculated risk Hans took that he’d be more helpful than hurtful with his intelligence when I can’t very well fucking fire him knowing he’ll go crying to Big Sissy and between the two of them I’ll have half of Parliament after my head if I’m lucky. Worse, he’ll get mad enough he’ll involve that dumbass brother of his and I’ll have offended people’s pocketbooks, not just their politics. People who know exactly how smart they aren’t are even worse than ones who overestimate it. They don’t have to convince themselves into doing illogical things for personal reasons.” “You could take Degurechaff from him if you want,” Kurt reasoned. “She’s been out of the public eye long enough you can claim she’s changed. You can’t take Sauer, obviously. Better the enemy you know.” Erwin tsked a few times, going so far as to wave a pointer finger back and forth. Half-lidded eyes tight with shrewd cunning and half-grin bursting with superiority, it was the face Kurt had seen time and again when Erwin had figured a way to outwit his enemies and worm his way out of a tight spot. “That’s part of the plan,” he whispered, entirely unnecessarily. The music had grown ever louder and their fellow patrons ever drunker. “The plan?” Kurt whispered back, hoping they were finally arriving at a breakthrough. “Him, her, all of doing this damned job, we’re-,” Erwin put his beer down so he could form both hands into fists, then crash the knuckles together like two rams bashing heads. He did it a few too many times, enough that the repeated motion became strangely suggestive about what was going on at their office. Kurt put his own hand up and used it to lower Erwin’s pointedly down to the counter. “Degurechaff was going to rejoin us one day regardless, right?” Erwin theorized. “Now, we both know the instant something comes out of her mouth, Erich’s on the other side, regardless of how right or wrong she is. So, I adopt her, he thinks whatever I’m doing is because of her, I’ll get a wall of Mr. Stubborn turned in my direction every time I give him an order.” Erwin cheerfully waved for another beer. There were few things he liked better than being given an excuse to explain his strokes of genius. “On the other hand, I let him think he has control, he treats her fairly.” Erwin snorted loud enough to attract unwanted attention. “Have you actually seen him outright oppose anything she’s said so far?” Kurt gave a tentative shake of his head. “Mostly, he acts as an accurate interpreter of whatever she wants into what’s realistic,” Erwin nodded. “So long as I catch her alone often enough to make up for anything mysteriously lost in translation…” Erwin flipped both wrists to splay his palms up and outwards and gave an innocent shrug. “...it’s perfect.” Kurt let out a long sigh. “Honestly,” he lamented, with good humor. “It’s like you only shuffled me over to Parliament because I’m outclassed by Satan’s minions plotting on either side of me.” “Anything to make life easier for a friend, ehh?” Erwin winked. He raised an arm and clapped Kurt on the shoulder. “ ‘Sides, only you speak pig-language like our elected leaders.” He leaned in a bit closer. Curious what the secret was, Kurt did the same. Only to receive two snorts in his ear imitating the animal in question. Impressed with his own prank, Erwin slapped the counter and broke out laughing. “Crafty creatures, pigs,” he remarked to the bartender, who’d mistaken the slap for a summons. He raised a finger and motioned at Kurt. “You can see it in their beady little eyes.” “The fuck do you know about pigs?” Kurt asked, joining in the laughter after waving the other man away. “Me?” Erwin questioned, devolving into an obnoxiously overperformed version of his home’s Suabian dialect. ”I’m juss a good ole countreh boy. Not like youse city folk.” He straightened up and cleared his throat. “My aunt and uncle had a pig when I was a kid, actually,” he nodded to himself. “Schnitzel.” Erwin didn’t need to elaborate on which uncle that was. The choice in names gave Kurt the impression it was the same one he always heard tales about. Kind of made sense if what Erwin said was true, and said uncle had acquired a camera for the sole purpose of creating a photo montage in his bathroom of his bare ass shown off in various non-private locations. The least believable part of the story was that this uncle wasn’t a blood relation of Erwin’s. “It was back when I was real young, though,” Erwin went on ruminating. “All I remember is they let me take it outside by myself one time they were over. I let it eat all the apples it wanted off the ground. Next thing you know, Schnitzel was on a mad dash around the house shitting everywhere.” “Oh Jesus,” Kurt gasped. “Ohhh no.” “No one could catch it once it got going,” Erwin laughed, nearly in tears again. “I think that’s the closest I ever got to being shot. The old man wanted a post-partum abortion for a good two weeks. His fuckin’ fault to begin with. All the way back to begin with, really, shouldn’t have hopped in bed with mom if he didn’t want me. Even so, he should’ve known better than to put me in charge of the damn thing.” Both wiping their eyes, a voice interrupted from behind. “Hey,” the unidentified man started. “Aren’t you-” “No,” Erwin replied curtly. Within a second, he’d gotten off his barstool, slammed a last bill on the counter, and was halfway to the door, foul mood hanging off him like a personal thunderstorm. “I’m going to go tell Lucy it’s time for our last fight,” Erwin declared once they were outside. He slammed a fist into an open palm for emphasis, infused with a drunken determination. “You…you’re…you’ve probly got a better night ahead of you, so…fuck you. And Lisbeth. Separately. She’ll hate you soon enough.” Kurt’s feet wandered him through the dark back down Königgrätzer Strasse. Halfway through he realized where they were taking him. Still in search of answers, it would seem. He thought he found the same spot in the same pew as before. And like before, God didn’t appear to him. He probably should have picked a more significant church than one conveniently located along his route. The pastor, however, did appear shortly after Kurt took a seat. Dressed for bed, the kindly-looking old man - older man - must have come to check which drunk lost soul had made its way in. With winter getting to its coldest days, it was almost surprising not to see a less figuratively homeless person there with him. “You in trouble, son?” his spiritual guide asked. “I might be soon,” he confessed. For the most part, everything Erwin had said, beginning with the height-hell relationship and ending with the allegory of what happened when Erwin was put in charge of pigs, had added up in one direction. The difficult direction, where he was responsible for preparing the country for the next war illegally. Also the direction Kurt was inclined to believe Satan would tempt him towards, were he to exist. “What kind, if it isn’t too much to ask?” “Oh, just…” Kurt drifted off. Was the world better off one way or the other? Was his country? What about his best friend? Shit, what if he made it about himself for once? “Just deciding between two halves of my heart. That’s all, really. Quite mundane, I suppose.” “Do you know which woman you’d rather pick?” He couldn’t wait to get home and brag to Lisbeth the priest assumed younger women had enough interest in him he had a choice between staying with her and riding off into the sunset with one of them. Technically, Degurechaff was a young woman, he supposed, though she didn’t quite complete the image in his head. “I do,” he chuckled. “I’m just afraid I’m…too eager because she is, you know? I feel like if this was really the right way, God wouldn’t be making me jump through so many hoops. He could just clear the path, I’d assume.” “The Lord directs our steps, so why try to understand everything along the way?” the priest intoned. “Proverbs.” On one hand, it wasn’t as cliché as God works in mysterious ways. That might be a sign it was meant specifically for him. On the other hand, the somewhat un-fatherly look in the pastor’s eyes made him think it was mostly a sign the man wanted an excuse to go back to bed with certain kinds of thoughts about older men and young women in his head. Kurt had gotten as far as inhaling to reply he wasn’t sure God would approve of those thoughts when the lights cut out. That felt more like a sign. A negative sign. “They’ll be back on in a minute,” the priest reassured. “Happens anytime there’s a bit of wind. A parishioner offered to wire us for electric for free, and…well, the most generous spirit of our Lord was with him that moment, to give what he didn’t have.” Not a sign, then. Except there was a perfect moonbeam shining through a window. A perfect moonbeam, on a winter evening in Berun, notorious for its months of clouds. Kurt rose to investigate. It lit up a spot on the floor of no apparent significance. Still, the chances the sky had cleared at the moments the lights went out - – hours earlier, he reminded himself. It had rained all morning and cleared up by four. Each winter Berun had a few clear days. That was nothing remarkable. With neither warning nor fanfare, the electricity flicked back on. Now that he could see again, he had one last idea. Kurt sat down in the nearest pew. After ensuring the pastor wasn’t watching, he plucked a Bible from the seatback and flipped it open to somewhere near the middle. He landed in Psalms. There was some promising talk of the righteous having triumph over their foes. A paragraph below, the longings of the wicked were coming to nothing. He gave up. Who knew what the untranslated version had meant to say way back when. The cold night’s breeze sobered him up enough to stop looking for answers from God. Whoever’s side he was on, it wasn’t Kurt’s, wasn’t the Empire’s; it was very doubtful He was on humanity’s side at all. Europa united under communist rule, Europa united under Imperial rule, either way it’d look like it was heading for the Tower of Babel, part two. No questions on how He’d felt about the first. Kurt approached the curb. At the exact moment a cab began pulling off to the side, he felt a tap at his shoulder. “Jesus wants me to give this to you,” he heard in accented Germanian. In the time he took trying to remember how close God and Jesus were rumored to be to the same person, the cab drove off. Kurt supposed he could hear Jesus out. Two minutes later, he was stewing in the back seat of a taxi. “I’m not driving you to the scene of a murder, am I?” his driver inquired, catching the expression on Kurt’s face. “If you don’t mind my asking.” “America,” was all he muttered. Some damned missionary had handed him some idiotic pamphlet about Jesus’s pending reappearance. “Well,” the driver chuckled, relaxed to know he wasn’t going to be called in as an accessory to a crime. “Death to America, then.” “They are loaning us a bunch of money, actually,” Kurt frowned. “You might not have a job if it weren’t for that. Probably shouldn’t say anything too…” He imagined he could hear what was drifting through the driver’s head when his knuckles whitened on the wheel. I was only being friendly. You looked like you needed a laugh. It’s not my fault you don’t have a sense of humor. Sorry, he mentally replied. I’m kind of stressed. Didn’t mean to take it out on you. Thanks for trying. When they arrived in front of his house, Kurt forked over some extra bills, doubting the telepathic apology had made it through. He hated himself, a fraction of a bit, for wondering if this got him closer to the righteous category from that Psalm. Not halfway to the staircase, Lisbeth caught him. For a moment, just a moment, he’d thought he was seeing double, wondered if he’d drunk more beers than he remembered. Two disappointed sighs. Two sets of crossed arms. Two visions of stately old women looking at him like he was a disobedient child. Fucking Lucy. She would be here the one night Erwin felt motivated to get things solved. “Well, I guess I know what I’m going home to,” Lucy groused. She was turned to address herself fully to Lisbeth, pointedly excluding him from the conversation. “An overgrown child of my own who’ll wail nonsensically at me. And can’t make it through the night without needing the bathroom.” “Begging you to open your blouse, too,” Lisbeth snickered. Kurt tried to catch her eye and get her to stop treating him like he wasn’t there. “Can’t stand being told playtime’s over and it’s time for a nap,” Lucy added. “Erwin’ll retire,” Kurt broke in. “When he can. There’s too much going on right now.” “And when won’t there be, in jobs like yours?” Lucy clucked. “Now’s as good a time as any. Seems you aren’t staying out late doing anything better than getting drunk on cheap beer.” She made a gratuitously loud sniff and crinkled her nose, then turned her attention back to his wife. “Do they think they’re going to get a sign from God?” she scoffed. “I don’t think He tends to make appearances as far up their asses as they’ve gotten themselves.” Kurt promptly ducked around them towards the stairs down to the kitchen. A spot more to drink was in order, some of his good stuff. Fucking Lucy. Always had to be right about everything. She and Erwin were perfect for each other. Now he could see it. She did have a point. Erwin had to be waiting for something. Something better than getting drunk on cheap beer, indeed. It was no wonder God wasn’t on mankind’s side. Taking into account all the mixed signals, there was only one conclusion to make: God was a woman. 
 
 December 20, 1931Berun-Charité Hospital
 
For the first time in a long time, Tanya didn’t recognize the face staring back at her in the mirror. The woman in it looked nothing like her. Overall, what she could see of her scenery was eminently familiar. By now, she’d spent hundreds of hours in Visha’s room. As time had gone on, small updates had been made to the space: each visit from Elya generated more wall decor; the flowers in the vase changed with the seasons; books, a stuffed animal, a blanket, an imbalanced number of candles and candlesticks and various other items gifted to Visha had slowly begun overtaking one corner with clutter. Nevertheless, nothing in the glass stood out. Except her. The culprit for this - both culprits - were outside the scope of what showed in the mirror. Visha, and what was apparently now Tanya’s makeup kit, were out of view. Visha had been so adamant about preventing her from looking before she was done she’d seated them in the blind spot of any evil shiny surfaces. Tanya reassessed her face once again. The fact that it was female at all had taken some getting used to. Very often, now that she’d become old enough for it to make a difference, it was still taking some getting used to. Regardless, after the initial shock had worn off, and especially once she’d stepped out into the career world, she’d never had much trouble equating the reflection she saw with herself. Certainly, aside from remaining human, she didn’t have many outward similarities to her old appearance. Cheesy as it sounded, that hadn’t stopped her from believing the same soul - or whatever you wanted to call it - was visibly present. She carried herself with confidence. She was good-looking in a plain way. Her hair and clothing were kept neat and up-to-date without being flashy. Her demeanor spoke to her being a serious, capable person. In other words, a consummate professional. What she saw now were none of those qualities. In its own form of magic, powders and pencils had transformed more than her physical attributes. Aside from the obvious shift away from bland corporate appeal and into looking as though she desired to evoke a wholly different form of attraction, the focused concentration she relied on to indicate she was intelligently assessing the matter in front of her gave off a horrendously alternative impression. Had a woman that looked like she did now given that kind of intense attention to the man she used to be, she’d have had a hard time not assuming a level of interest had been indicated. Happily, the only person she was at risk of accidentally leading on was herself. “I said it was okay to make me look like a better version of myself,” she reminded Visha. “Not like some alien…prostitute.” “I wanted to try going all out,” she sulked. “And you mostly look weird because your hair and clothes don’t match. Not because I made you look like an alien prostitute.” With a sigh, Tanya gave up on that line of argument. As she couldn’t offer any valuable critiques over what Visha had done wrong to achieve such an undesirable result, it would come out insulting instead of constructive. “I’m not going to be able to do this myself,” Tanya said, trying another path. “No matter how good it is. Where did you learn, anyway?” “Elya.” “Where did she learn?” Visha paused her clean-up effort to shrug. “She originally wanted to be an actress.” The tidbit of background was unsurprising. No wonder Tanya looked more ready for a glamor shot than a get-together. “Right,” she nodded. “Well, let’s aim for more realistic goals next time I need something like this.” “Yeah, yeah,” Visha agreed. While she continued putting things away, Tanya poured a pitcher of water into the basin in front of her and began the process of undoing her work. “Is…” she paused to rub at her eyelashes again, seeing another black streak appear on the washcloth. “Is there some kind of trick to this?” “Oh, it can take a day or so.” Tanya gave her eyes a last pat and decided to end their torment for now. They’d been through a lot. One of the first things Visha had done was yank the lids apart like she was in a horror flick. Brandishing a pointy object in her free hand hadn’t helped. “Done!” Visha announced, handing over her re-packed Christmas gift proudly. Tanya had already received a potted plant of some sort she was going to have to learn to take care of. Visha had indicated she thought her apartment could use some life. When Tanya had enquired as to why, the other woman had pulled a very convincingly innocent face. In her experience, that either meant she’d gotten information from Elya that Elya had no business knowing, or she was avoiding a rude observation. Unless Elya was due for a stint in jail for some B&amp;E, it was safe to assume that in this case, Visha’s hemming and hawing on an answer had been due to the latter. And hey, Tanya couldn’t say she didn’t have a point. For her part, Tanya had bought Visha a toiletry roll for traveling. With a pending transfer of residence to the countryside, she suspected Visha would be in want of some essentials for making her way back and forth to Berun. She’d found it a month ago by happenstance, at the leather goods store she’d gone to for Lehrgen’s gift. Visha didn’t complain over the somewhat masculine style; both of them saw the sleek combination of design and function as desirable. She even went so far as to term it “chic”. Tanya’s other gift she couldn’t rightly say she’d bought. She had a plethora of purses stuck in a closet from her time with the Ugar family, and trouble seeing what she would ever do with more than one casual and one formal. She’d invited one of the women in the office over for an extremely brief visit in order to select one for Visha. Klara had received her own pick of the litter for her trouble. “Your aunt and uncle are picking you up tomorrow?” Tanya confirmed. “Until the weekend after New Year’s,” Visha nodded. “You? Maybe…going to visit Erna?” Tanya gave a noncommittal shrug. “Tell me you’re doing something for Christmas,” Visha bemoaned. “I am,” Tanya protested. “Just…I have my own things to take care of.” “Like?” “Plotting,” Tanya admitted, feeling her pose grow defensive. Visha’s unimpressed stare didn’t seem to appreciate her humor. “It’s become a yearly ritual,” she said, shaking off her bad posture to stand up. She selected a chocolate from the bowl by Visha’s bed. “I have a few days off work to spend thinking of myself.” “Mmhmm. And what did you plot last year?” “How to try to keep Kruppe alive without arms sales,” Tanya shot back. She popped the chocolate celebratorily into her mouth with a smile of satisfaction. Visha made a noise halfway between a sigh and a groan. “I’d rather make it so what happened to you won’t happen you won’t happen again,” Tanya explained hastily, as soon as she realized what she’d said to someone with a personal bone to pick with the Federation. “I want what’s best for the country.” “I know,” Visha said. “I don’t think you’re a bad person.” She reached into the candy jar herself and took two out. One she lobbed at Tanya. If the magically-shot chocolate bullet could be called that. “Though you did have your moments,” she winked. “Show off,” Tanya replied. Visha had a much higher capacity for channeling mana than she did. The vast gulf became more apparent performing orbless magic, where most of your energy applied to a spell frittered away uselessly without something to focus it in. “What’s this year, then?” Visha laughed. “A hostile takeover?” “Laying the groundwork for one, maybe,” Tanya joked. “No…more - umm - average career concerns for a girl my age, I hate to admit.”“Girls your age don’t normally have careers,” Visha pointed out. “Precisely,” Tanya muttered. She took her seat back and flopped into it. Her thumb went to rub between her eyes. “That’s the issue.” “You’re thinking outside the Army, then?” By her tone, Tanya could tell she’d piqued Visha’s curiosity. It wasn’t that she didn’t trust Visha. She did. Elya, on the other hand, had a worrying level of devotion to the Imperial Army, along with expertise in extracting secrets. “At my level, it’s an issue there too without a war on,” she frowned. “Regardless, I’m trying to keep my options open. No point in limiting myself. The world’s a big place. There could be something else out there for me.” Tanya flung herself back out of her chair and walked the length of the room. Owing to its small size, she’d turned on her heel and made her way to the end near Visha by the time she replied. “Do you ever…never mind.” Tanya paused what she belatedly realized was her pacing. “What?” “I don’t know. Take time off.” “If there was something I wanted to do more, I’d do it,” Tanya replied confidently. “But I don’t.” “If you say so…” Visha drifted off, still trying to puzzle through the response Tanya had given. Tanya turned away to hide her smile at Visha’s confusion. When she’d been college-aged the first time around, she wouldn’t have accepted the answer so easily either. She hadn’t slacked off in her university years, by anyone’s estimation. Her grades and attendance had received no complaints. There existed a wide gap between maintaining at that level and spending the twilight of her days of freedom doing nothing but practicing living within the bounds her next phase of life would impose. She’d had the time to indulge in some frivolity then, and like Visha, she’d prioritized taking it. For the next two or three decades it would go on the back burner. Then, presumably, if you’d done it right, you started to get it back. Tanya wouldn’t know. She hadn’t made it that far. With the state of her new world, it was hard to say when she might. Still, all she could do was try. Her alternative was giving up and telling Being X he’d won. Plus, she didn’t mind the effort it took. Building a stable life through careful planning was the territory of responsible adults, and, well, she enjoyed being a responsible adult. Eventually, Visha would come to understand the same way Tanya had. For now, her measured approach to life put her in harmony with an older crowd. “I have to write back to Weiss, too,” Tanya nodded to herself. “Give him an exact date for visiting. With the baby and all I figure he’ll want to save money, so I have to decide if I’ll offer to let him sleep on my couch.” “Maybe he should wait…” Visha hummed. “Until things are more settled.” “Well…” Tanya cleared her throat. The subject of her future living arrangements were somewhat awkward to discuss at that point. She planned on switching apartments anyway. With that in mind, there was a potential to revisit Visha’s future plans; however, to avoid ruining their friendship by involving money and personal minutiae, a thorough analysis of gaps needed to be done, and appropriate remediations put in place. Some pre-work on her part was included in Tanya’s plan for how to use her time over the holiday. She didn’t want to put an offer on the table before she completed that. “My lease is up in February,” Tanya explained. “And I can’t stand my neighbors. Weiss was going to help me with some of the bigger stuff.” She gave a guilty smile to Visha. “And maybe packing if I swap him for a couch.” “Six weeks before the baby is due…” Visha groaned, slapping her hands to her face and rubbing them down. “Tanya. You’re a woman now. You should know better.” “That’s unfair,” she snapped, having difficulty processing what she was hearing. She wasn’t unaware a few nosy neighbors might have some thoughts about an unidentified man staying with her for a weekend. That Visha was suspicious of either of their intentions was nothing short of insulting. “You’re making too big a deal over it.” “What if you were his wife?” Visha objected, voice rising. “I wouldn’t marry someone that irresponsible,” Tanya hurled back. Unpleasant memories of one woman she’d gone on a few dates with drifted up. No matter how many times she’d explained to Karin that yes, women got invited to nomikai nowadays, and no, she hadn’t been doing anything other than taking twenty minutes to see a female coworker home safely to avoid two weeks of HR paperwork, she hadn’t gotten through. Not to be unfair to Karin, Tanya counted it in her favor that she’d put her red flags on display so early. It had been quite considerate. That had allowed her an easy excuse for not wanting to see that prospect through to anything more serious. The unexpected sound of laughter broke through her recollections. “You’re impossible,” Visha chuckled. “I take back what I said earlier. You’re evil. Pure evil.” She shook her head at Tanya in mock disappointment. “So on that note, Merry Christmas, happy plotting, try not to kill anyone with it. Especially yourself.” Tanya gave a humored sniff of her own. This was the year she set herself on the path that would determine the rest of her life. “I won’t,” she promised. “Have a good holiday.” 
 
 December 24, 1931General Staff Office, Imperial Capital Berun
 
There was one thing left to do before Erich von Lehrgen left the office for the day. After he felt his way absently for the pull to turn his lamp on and gave it a swift tug, there were two. Half of the glass shade was left a dark, dulled green; one of the bulbs beneath it hadn’t joined its brethren across the country lighting up offices one by one, soon to be joined first by streetlamps and then by bedroom lamps as the muted sun headed towards setting behind a blanket of clouds. Any other day, his hand would have next drifted to his phone. Just as distractedly as it had found the receiver and picked it up to be cradled between ear and shoulder while he carried on with work, it would have pushed the furthest button to the right in the row that ran under the rotary dial. A moment later, an overextended y-e-e-e-ssir! would come down the line, being late enough Ernst began injecting variations into a phrase he’d said a hundred times that day. In response to the break from hearing it the same way for the hundred and first time, Erich always gave a hum of appreciation. Not a laugh; it was something wearier. He’d pass along the news. Any other day, he’d probably have a new bulb twisted in place within the hour. Today, though, today was Christmas Eve. Past lunch, it was no one’s job to do anything beyond finish as quickly as they could to get home to their families, light their trees, go to church and hope the pastor didn’t mention how long it had been, then rush home to unwrap their gifts. Himself, he only had Werner and Lisa to drop in on, and they weren’t ones for keeping traditions. He had no reason not to stay besides that it would make people wonder why he wasn’t leaving, whether there was something wrong. Some would ask and learn there wasn't, which would earn him a look of pity for having devoted himself so completely to work that he'd forgotten the simpler pleasures of family, friends and faith. Others wouldn't say a word, would stay until the day was done out of politeness or expectation, silent and resentful that they'd been kept at their desks for no good reason, unable to leave until their boss had. Remain or leave, there was one employee his decision would have no impact on. She'd stay until her assigned hours were up and perhaps past, assiduously laboring away like her work was a Christmas present unto itself. After last year, he couldn't even count on her to keep away from the office the following day. Once he finished this last bit of paperwork, he was off to go evict her. His part of the form on his desk was one he might be able to fill in blind, at this point. It was little more than the matter of a signature after first making a review for accuracy and second falsifying his assessment that the request was legitimate by checking the box saying so. When Ernst returned from his break after the New Year, he’d have a resolution waiting for him. No more giving away his identification tags as souvenirs to girls, because that was where Erich knew they were disappearing to. Nobody lost things that often. An alcoholic that began each morning unsure how he’d gotten home the night before kept better track of his possessions. That formality finished and put in the outgoing tray, with a passing moment of regret that in his hurry to catch up when he’d first been promoted, he might have missed what was looking like his last opportunity to see what a general’s tags went for in the world of women, Erich turned his half-working lamp back off, stood, stretched, took his coat, shut his office up. Sure as sunrise, Tanya was there, her quarter-open door letting a ray of light through into the hall to announce her ever-presence. “Degurechaff,” he called, accompanied by a knock. The door was open enough to pop his head through. He nearly left it at that, though quickly decided not to. Peeking in as he was, his request would come across a suggestion; walking in to impose his shadow over her desk would make clear that this was closer to an order than anything she’d heard in four years. He couldn’t put his finger precisely on the date she’d first started on doing what she was doing right now: largely ignoring him while she spilled her thoughts in frantic scribbles of black ink on off-white, head bent down, bobbing along in nods that made her push her hair behind her ears every few seconds because it was too short to tie back. That didn’t stop her from trying when she felt busy, as she was now. It used to be he earned more than an mmhmm of acknowledgement and received her immediate and undivided attention the moment she sensed his presence. Seeing she was in the middle of something and knowing he was about to disrupt it, he stood in front of her desk without saying more while she finished the thought. When she did, she leaned back enough to look up at him. “Leaving for the weekend?” she guessed. “Yes. And so are you.” He rapped his knuckles twice on her desk for emphasis. In turn, her left wrist flipped her watch face towards her. Though he had an approximate sense of the hour, his eyes darted down to read it too. “Alright,” she agreed, once they were back to looking at each other. “A few minutes of finishing up and I’ll be gone.” He backed up two steps and dropped into the soft cushion of her second chair. Years past, when space was at a premium, an office the size of hers might have belonged to someone higher ranked than him. His legs stretched out into the emptiness; his back settled into a comfortable lean; were it not for the hints she could do without cigarettes he’d have lit one. Nonetheless, his attitude was unmistakable: I’ll wait. Tanya was unamused. One eyebrow briefly flickered up, her lips twitched into a momentary frown. A soft harrumph floated its way over to him. “That seems extreme.” “Desperate times; desperate measures.” “I didn’t think I’d been doing a bad job leaving on time when I have something else to do,” she commented. She frowned again, this time letting it stick more permanently. “It’s not that,” he assured, deciding not to add that her performance on that count has been decent only in relation to its previously abysmal state. He had little enough room to criticize. “But if I have to tell the security detail to deny you entry into the building until Monday, I will. I saw you were here last year over the holiday. That’s two in a row.” “Oh,” she remarked innocently. It was a very good thing for her that her survival had never depended on her ability to look innocent. “I didn’t realize you were here, too.” “I wasn’t,” he clarified. “I saw you in Pariser Platz while I was on my way to a party.” Her frown returned deeper than ever. Paired with the drawn brows, he could tell she was trying to puzzle out something. As long as it wasn’t the kind of fundamentally-absurd-yet-logically-sound type of argument she sometimes came up with - you didn’t actually see me in here, maybe I was going to a party also, in slacks and a button-down, it’s the only outfit I own, you can check my closet, it’s ten of the same thing - for once, he didn’t much care what she was thinking about. “I didn’t realize there were private homes in Pariser Platz, she said. “Must be nice.” “The Adlon,” he corrected. “You know, the big hotel there? It’s like a social…club…thing.” It occurred to him then that there were some parts of his life he had no idea how to describe with a succinct and clear definition, because everyone who needed to know probably knew and anyone who didn’t would probably never need to. Briefly, he wondered how Elya had managed to bridge the divide. Brute force curiosity, most likely. Elise didn’t have that, which was mostly a good thing, but because they mostly avoided calling too much attention to their individual pasts to focus on the present together, these things were mostly communicated by a slow osmosis. In the meantime, Tanya’s concentration had shifted entirely away from the notes on her desk. She was frozen in place, pen poised a half-centimeter off the page to continue writing, her gaze fixed at a spot somewhere over his right shoulder. The only part of her that moved was her face. Her eyes widened slightly and her lips pulled just the smallest bit back at the corners. Combined with the wisps of flyaway hair, she looked like a mad scientist struck by a sudden stroke of genius. “I’ve wanted to try the restaurant there for years,” she said. “Except tables are hard to come by.” She was trying the innocent, Tanya-the-poor-orphan act again. It managed to be still yet less successful than the last time. The grim determination behind it was several times more effective at convincing him he was better off giving her what she wanted. “I told Wechter months ago it was his turn to make the rounds,” he told her. “Sorry.” She remained undeterred. “Oh, Major Wechter,” she chimed out, sunny smile on her face. “We get along quite well. If he’s still here, I don’t mind asking if it would bother him if I tagged along.” Erich’s head turned towards the hall, knowing that a few doors down Wechter’s light was still on, or was, five minutes ago. He cleared his throat to give himself time to think up a counterargument to offset her deft avoidance of rejection. “That’s…” he begins. Looking at the funny-looking spike of a ponytail sticking off the back of her head, an idea for laying one of the few trump cards he held over her came to him. “That’s not the issue,” he replied. “It’s just…you’d need a proper dress, so…” Her eyes flickered upwards to think to herself, then she nodded. “I think I can do that.” He winced in momentary defeat, remembered the time, and glanced triumphantly down at his watch. “All the stores are closed by now,” he drawled. “It’s a pity.” “That’s not a problem,” she assured. “I have plenty from Ugar’s wife. I just need to…to figure out which one.” His mouth opened to breathe in so he might breathe another objection back out. He closed it instead, to give a reluctant, grudging sort of nod. He wasn’t sure why he was so adamant over denying her request to begin with, except that it was her, and it was Christmas, and learning to face her on a new field sounded like anything but a present. Be nice, he tutted, reminding himself he owed her now what they took away from her way back when; it suited both of their designs on her future career to see to it she got the chance to connect with people outside the orbit of military life. Wechter’s presence would only simplify matters. In the improbable event this was what started a chain reaction leading to Tanya switching course, Lehrgen could credibly claim that wasn’t his intention when Romel - or worse, Zettour - inevitably came to accuse him of planning it. Just a boss helping along the careers of two talented subordinates in the usual way. Luckily for his own chances of survival, he was much better at playing innocent than Tanya. “Hey-,” her voice broke through. He was on the threshold between the hall and her office. At first, he believed her pause was to wait for him to turn around. She remained silent another two beats, face a picture of mild shock. “...sir,” she continued, shaking it off. “I don’t know how trying to arrange a taxi’s going to go so late when most of the drivers are probably off. I don’t mind the walk, but…” She paused again and gave a short laugh. “I do believe it was you who told me I couldn’t wear boots under a dress. I know it’s kind of the opposite direction from where you’ll be coming from. Would it be too much trouble to swing by and get me on your way?” “As long as you don’t mind squeezing in with Wechter,” he shrugged. “I’ll go tell him.” “Look, Wechter,” he said, when he’d exchanged one office for another. He sighed and pinched the bridge of his nose for a second, feeling slightly rude changing plans last minute. “How would you feel if Degurechaff came along with us?” Wechter schooled his expression back into neutrality in short order. All the same, Erich had seen it, the shock then suspicion then approval. It was not hard to guess the reason. As Tanya said, Wechter didn’t mind her company as coworkers. As competition, she was far less desirable. “Right,” Wechter blinked. “Alright.” “Something else you wanted to say?” Wechter hesitated. His eyes looked at everything in the room but Erich. “I guess it’s a step in the right direction for you two,” he mumbled out. Lehrgen mirrored the surprise-suspicion spectrum back. Wechter hadn’t been around to hear most of his complaints leveled against Tanya. Obviously, he’d been told. “If you don’t mind my opinion,” Wechter squeaked out under the scrutiny. Erich glanced back towards the hall to make sure the object of their discussion wasn’t out there. “As long as you realize I’d appreciate your…discretion on the topic,” Lehrgen sighed. “I am actually trying to help her, strange as that may seem, just, I’m not sure anyone else would believe it. Degurechaff included.” Wechter didn’t look like he entirely believed him either, though he promised not to start any rumors that Erich was back to trying to damage Tanya’s reputation. Erich suspected that was the reaction he’d get from most people. After so many years spent in the camp of her detractors, he couldn’t blame them. His time off passed too fast, like always. He drank too much at Werner’s on Christmas Eve, woke up in a daze, and spent several moments irrationally convinced he was trapped in a dream, before remembering Lisa had the house redone to only contain three colors in the whole place, and the scenery was real. Elise came over later that day. He couldn’t escape the feeling that she was waiting for something more than he’d given her, so he faked a headache and went to bed early. He knew they weren’t getting any younger. Still, they were both old enough to realize how fragile each piece of life could be. If one was challenging, the others - work, love, health, family, friendships - must be able to bear it, or they would all fall apart together. When he was younger, he hadn’t known how close being responsible for fixing leaks everywhere all the time would feel like drowning. It made it so you had to ignore all the parts and get things in order one by one. Before the war, it had all been sorted. Ten years ago he’d been twenty-eight, not far off from the height of his physical fitness, slept regularly, smoked irregularly. His family had existed benignly in the background exchanging visits every so often; most of his friends hadn’t yet had children or gotten important jobs that took all their time. And work - work had been as it was supposed to be, him with unshakeable confidence in the purpose of what he was doing and newly-promoted to Major, the rank at which officers traditionally began seeking wives if they didn’t already have them. Love had been all that eluded him back then, and everything else had been strong enough to take its inevitable ups and downs in stride until that, too, settled in place. Then came children, and you spent the rest of your time managing them through the same process you’d completed, with enough time on the side to keep your own life running smoothly. Instead, the war, and things had come out on the other side in shambles. Not one part, all of it. His family and friendships had been virtually unrecognizable and in need of immediate attention. His job had come next, catching up, getting the outstanding workload back to manageable, and in the middle of it, along came Tanya to remind him not to get too comfortable that he was doing the right thing, or, indeed, that anything he did would matter at all if she and her ilk got their way. Slowly, his health had caught up; slowly, he’d eased one foot into a relationship. Now, with things heading towards an acceptable resolution with work, he could imagine jumping in with both feet would land him on solid ground. Another year, not even, and Elise wouldn’t have to worry that other parts of his life were going to ruin their life, nor would he have to worry that the extra difficulties that came along with marrying her would ruin things all over again for him. Saturday morning he called her to apologize for sending her home. Told her the prospect of dragging Tanya along to this thing was the reason for the headache. Elise knew their history. She’d understand why that might give him a headache. Saturday afternoon he unfolded his largest map of Europa to decide where his next vacation was going to be, and before he’d landed on the perfect answer, it was Saturday evening and for the eleventh year in a row he was rushing to turn through each cufflink in his collection, hunting for the match to the one already on his left arm. Every year he promised himself he'd put them all back into their individual boxes so the pairs remained together and he never again had to upend a velvet bag on a table and spill every piece he owned out. Every year, it only grew worse. One way or another, he'd acquire a new set, adding them to the already voluminous collection. Some were heirlooms, some were gifts, others the product of a rare personal indulgence which somehow always resulted in him purchasing a new set to be stashed away and never seen again instead of investing in something more practical. Two-thirds of the way through the pile, he came upon the design he'd been looking for and hurriedly threaded it through his right sleeve. Pausing for a quick look in the mirror and straightening his white bowtie, he grabbed a light coat, the day unseasonably warm, and dashed out the door of his house, almost forgetting to grab the house key before he left, already two minutes late for the taxi he'd arranged. Wechter’s stop, over in Karlottenburg, came first. He had the prescience to take the front passenger seat, which meant when it came time for Tanya to inelegantly clamber in, it was Erich’s job to put up with the ensuing drama of needing to shrink up against the door on his side to give her more space to maneuver. “You try walking down five flights of stairs in heels,” she hissed after catching his concerned glance at the shoes in her hands and the flimsy pair of slippers on her feet. “But you can walk-,” “Yes,” she grunted, not looking up. Her head was bent all the way into her lap to latch the straps around her ankles. “Just not stairs.” While she was occupied he took the time to openly make a dress code inspection. Her outfit was perfectly appropriate, if staid, simple, dark blue velvet that draped down to wrists and ankles with nothing more than a fifteen centimeter bib of white lace around the collar for adornment. The black of the shoes she was putting on didn’t compliment her dress, precisely. They were an unremarkable set of proper heels, which was what mattered. Once she was finished and had moved on to balling up her slippers to stuff in her purse, he could see she’d even made her hair more obedient than usual. By instinct, Erich offered her his arm to help her out of the car, then retracted it quickly, just as she put her hand out to grab it. They caught eyes and laughed at the awkward timing. He’d assumed she’d take it as an insult. She, just as surely, felt embarrassed about asking for help now that it wasn’t being given. His arm went out for her again, and she clung to it for dear life. He let her get her balance, then gently disengaged them, drawing his hand slowly backwards so she knew it was leaving instead of suddenly removing it. His fingers brushed past her elbow for a final send off, and with a shiver of apprehension she took her first steps unaided. He walked slowly on her account, and Wechter too, though the other man kept some distance between them. Tanya didn’t fall and bring someone down with her, as Wechter must have feared. They made it into the ballroom without incident. Unlike the last year, Erich hadn’t arrived early. The room is about as full as it was likely to get. Not long past the door, he spotted the heir to a small but very old bank. Albert Hochstetter was a harmless enough character to drop Tanya off with after a quick introduction. Wechter went to Mathias Scheider, who was in the telephone business. After that introduction, Erich looked up to first grab something to drink off a circulating tray, then to decide if he was staying in the current conversation or off to socialize on his own. The first sip of ruby-red punch he took was too sweet for his taste. By the third, when he spotted Bruno von Hammerstein’s shock of black hair sitting atop his short, stocky frame, the drink had grown him. Bruno was one of Otto’s closest friends. Last Erich heard, he’d been running around the Southern Continent building his trading empire. They hadn’t seen each other since the war ended. Judging by the tanned face and sharp new suit, Bruno hadn’t let the demise of the Imperial colonies stop him. "Erich," Hammerstein called out, in that booming voice of his, when he noticed him approaching. "I would address you by your title but it changes each time I see you." "Not on the Southern Continent anymore, I take it?" "No, no, I got out of there before I lost everything." "The family's back in Berun, then?" "I had some business to take care of here, but they're all at the new place in Madinah." "Isn't that dangerous? Magna Rumeli could topple any day." "And I intend to profit from it," Hammerstein said, with a lopsided grin. "Who's the girl you handed off to Hochstetter?" “Tanya Degurechaff, if you can believe it. And the other one’s Gustav Wechter. He’s a major now, should make it further.” “In the flesh?” Bruno raised an eyebrow and turned his attention to her for a half a minute, completely ignoring Wechter, as Erich had known would happen. “She doesn’t look nearly as scary as I expected. I suppose the stuff they printed about her in half the newspapers back in the day must be wrong if you all are letting her out of whatever cage you’ve been keeping her in.” “It’s…she’s…complicated,” Erich sighed, motioning back and forth between the two of them a few times. “Things with her are complicated.” “Hard to reinstate her as an officer without cleaning up some of the worse rumors, though?” Bruno guessed. “That,” Erich agreed. “And like I said, it’s complicated.” “How many of them were true? The rumors.” “All of them,” Erich groaned. “All?” “Well, not all,” he said. “But a lot.” He drained the last of his punch for emphasis. Yes, her pride could give the Devil a run for his money, and barely a major, she’d decided to tell the field marshal in Norden he could go fuck himself, in so many words, rather than play along with orders she didn’t like. Yes, she’d managed to misbehave so badly at her court martials she was partly to blame for causing a rift between the staff officers running the war on one side and Supreme Command and the government on the other. Yes, she’d burnt down a city. Yes, she’d actually successfully commanded all those units and operations as a young teen. Yes, her promotions had been rushed, but not undeserved. Yes, she’d practically invented several forms of combat. Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Yes, this was why he hadn’t wanted to bring Tanya in the first place. She had a tendency to take over any part of his life she got involved with. “So the worse rumors are true, then,” Bruno said skeptically. “Only the good ones are too. That’s what you’re-,” “No, no,” Erich objected. “I mean, yes, they were all true, but I brought her because she’s…” He looked over to where she was chatting animatedly and Hochstetter was surviving, at the least. “I don’t know,” he sighed. “Grown up, I guess. Found the middle instead of hopping between either end. I don’t want her ending up back in the field and getting unstable again.” Bruno snorted. “I’ll take your word for it. Do my best to let people know she’s…well, you can’t call her normal, but that if she ends up sticking around here in strategy we shouldn’t all take it as a future declaration of war, necessarily.” “Anyway,” Erich cut in. In his experience, giving Bruno any kind of excuse to talk about himself immediately redirected the conversation there until you excused yourself to use the bathroom. Once upon a time, he’d begrudged people like that, who implicitly seemed to say to him they felt their thoughts, their triumphs, their trials were so much worthier that there was no point hearing his story, because it would take away from theirs. Somewhere along the way, he’d gotten to the point of welcoming a one-sided conversation with anyone who made themselves the center of the universe. It provided a convenient distraction from letting his own life and its problems take center stage. Half the time, that all led to the same place. Or person, rather. “...what are the Arabian lands like?” he asked. “I’m sure you’ve got some good stories.” A wicked grin and an ahh, don’t tell my wife was how it started. It ended a good while later when the three glasses of punch Erich had drunk were indeed catching up with him, and he paused Bruno in the middle of explaining how he’d become the chief of some tribe via single combat, which seemed like the sort of thing your wife would know, even if you didn’t tell her. Upon returning, he saw Wechter had found himself another group to chat with, and Hochstetter no longer looked like he was surviving being lectured about his job by an eighteen-year-old girl, especially because he knew she was right. Erich pulled Tanya away to go bother someone else. The rest of the evening he spent checking occasionally on Wechter to put in a good word, and frequently on Tanya to make sure she hadn’t said anything upsetting to people who would need to be inoculated against her in quarter-hour increments before they were ready for the full dose. Sometimes he stuck around with one of his two partners for a while, other times he found friends of his own. Somewhere around eight-thirty, he sat himself at a table to take a break. The wood of his chair creaked as he adjusted backwards to counterbalance straightening his leg to get into a pocket, then creaked again when he leaned all the way forward, elbows on knees, head bent down to light the cigarette he’d taken out. Assuming he’d sat down for dinner, the first thing he saw when he looked up was Tanya making her way over. She all but collapsed into the seat across from him. Perhaps she was only in need of a break, too. The same species of overwhelmed exhaustion he felt was written visibly in her half-closed eyes and slack jaw, in the inelegant pose, knees splayed out and back resting on the chair, same as his. So he didn’t say a word, because neither wanted it, merely turned to put the hand holding his cigarette on the outside. He puffed contentedly away, several times catching eyes with Wechter to try to silently call him over to the table to eat. Four attempts in, Wechter gave a thumb up and an encouraging nod, and Erich understood the message. He’d found better people to dine with than him and Tanya. That probably wasn’t difficult. Erich straightened up. Tanya did the same. “You have anything to eat yet?” he asked. She shook her head. “I could use it, though.” “Had some drinks?” he guessed. “Nothing I didn’t know I could handle,” she scowled. “That wasn’t, I-,” Attentive to each change of body language, a member of the waitstaff had noticed they had gone from resting to potentially wanting something. Menus interrupted the friendly approach he’d made to asking her about how she’d gotten what seemed to him too much of an introduction to adult vices. It had been hanging about in his mind for a while now. The Malbec, the cigarettes. Whether it was to do the right thing or only to satisfy himself that it wasn’t his fault she felt the need to turn to them he could no longer say. His attention turned to the menu, painstakingly hand-inked with illuminated lettering and designs in the margins like it had been pulled from a thirteenth-century Bible. His eyes skipped over the appetizers - nothing beat the mushroom soup - and went to the entrees. Second from the end sat a rack of lamb prepared in the Françoise style. Were it not for his memories of Tanya-induced stomachaches, that would be his selection. He had never had to make conversation with her that lacked a clear purpose. Erich lifted his gaze from the menu to assess how easy her mood was and noticed her own eyes were flickering between him and the menu. “What?” “How do you feel about foie gras?” she asked, giving an apologetic smile. “I’ve always kind of wanted to try it.” “It’s…you should try it.” “You don’t like it.” “I don’t dislike it,” he told her. “But I’m glad my grandparents paid for me to try it.” “Ahh.” “You can try it. I’ll consider it passing along the favor.” “No, I just assumed I must be missing out on something at the price.” “Not in my opinion. Caviar either.” He put out his cigarette. “The mushroom soup’s so good you have to put in the order a day in advance. I’d already set aside two and Wechter’s not here for his, so, trust me. It’s what you want.” “Any other recommendations?” she asked. “It’s all good,” he said. “The turkey isn’t something you see every day. Maybe it’s a bit of thanks to the Americans for throwing us some loans. Last time I encountered turkey, actually…” “Yes?” she questioned, after he said nothing for too long. “It’s a stupid story,” he chuckled into the last of his drink. She didn’t encourage him, exactly. She didn’t discourage him either. She continued staring across the table in wait and gave the choice to him - tell the story or get back to the menu. “I was pretty young,” he ventured. Despite it being of passing interest to listeners, the turkey story was one of his favorites. It was one of his earliest clear memories. “My father had this very eccentric…well - it was his uncle, I guess, by marriage,” he recalled. Erich wondered if Werner remembered this as strongly as he did. “And my great uncle was kind of fascinated by the Americans and their turkeys, so gets his hands on a turkey somehow.” Erich laughed too early, the way he normally did when he told this story. “We were going to eat the turkey, of course, so it has to go to the unhappy tree stump where you usually did the chickens.” He cut his hand across his throat in a chopping motion, in case it wasn’t clear. “This thing, after its head is off, manages not just to run but to fly. It gets onto the roof of the house and dies up there, stuck in some crevice it took us hours to retrieve it from.” The story never came out as comical as he remembered it. “The image of it flying without the head…you know, it was very absurd. Funny in a really bad way. That’s the last time I saw turkey on a menu.” He checked Tanya’s face again, and the impassive expression hadn’t changed since he started. “Not the best thing to tell before eating, I guess.” At that, she cracked a smile. “It’s been a while,” she nodded. “But you are talking to someone who ate any number of meals after seeing that happen to people. You’re far from having ruined my dinner.” “Right, well, let’s not think about that,” he rushed on. “That’s - umm-,” The waiter returned to take down what they’d be eating. In Erich’s confused hesitance to find something safe, he belatedly realized he’d put in three side orders of potatoes in various preparations as his meal. He would go to his grave swearing he heard Tanya mutter “fucking Germans,” like she wasn’t one. “So,” Tanya cleared her throat. “I was finally putting together some of those first findings for you based on sifting through all our records to see what falls out as useful.” “Let’s not talk about work,” Erich interrupted. “Let’s…not.” Tanya said nothing further. At all. They were left glancing occasionally across the table at each other until their first course arrived. “I’ve been meaning to ask…” he began, pausing for a sip of soup. “We should probably submit an update on the fortifications assessment soon. Do we still have explainable research left to do or are we running out?” “Mm,” she chuckled, mid-taste herself. “So we can talk about the work we’re not doing? This is excellent, by the way.” He groaned. “No, no, you’re right. On both counts.” “Why do you keep Sauer around?” she fired back. “If that isn’t too rude. I’d bet you can have anyone you want.” “Not like you were hiding it,” Erich said. “But that’s about work.” “That’s not my impression.” “Then what’s Serebryakov to you?” “I asked first.” “I - ahh-,” Erich shook his head and took another bite. “I do consider him closer to a friend than I should. But it is about work. Really.” She continued eating, her unconvinced expression mocking him all the while. “Look,” he said. He set his spoon down to explain. As soon as he noticed his mistake, he took it off the tablecloth to put it on the plate beneath his bowl. That made the problem all the more apparent, a cream-brown stain on pristine white that would stare at him accusingly for the rest of the meal. “I needed a friend,” he sighed. “Still do half the time. You rub people the wrong way getting too far too fast. Keep that in mind for yourself.” “Not much I can do about it at this point,” she shrugged. “Might as well keep going since that’s going to be the case either way.” “Sauer’s good at smoothing things over, first off. Second, I don’t know if it happens to you, but sometimes I can think so much about a problem I get so tangled in the middle I can’t see a way out. You can always count on him to see things differently than the rest of us. Not that he’s always right but he’s close enough it throws you a lifeline so you can look at things with fresh eyes.” Erich went back to eating. Though there was more to be said, Tanya didn’t need to know it. It would tread too close to telling her that one day, he’d long feared he might need all the help he could get convincing the other generals not to listen to her. He’d failed the last time, and didn’t plan on doing that again. “And?” “And what?” “You…you’re making the face,” she huffed. “When we’re in meetings sometimes you come out and tell me afterwards that you didn’t say everything you felt. You’re making the same face as that. I can tell. That’s all.” He was suddenly glad it was potatoes coming after the soup was done. He pushed his half-finished bowl away. The cream settled heavily into the pit that had been created in his stomach. In all the time he’d spent figuring out what it was that made Tanya tick, she’d done the same back to him. “Do you mind if I…?” She pointed at his unfinished food, oblivious. He nodded. “Ernst knows he owes me some,” Erich sighed. “I can trust he works for me and no one else. I let him get away with more I should in return. Plus, I really do like him. He’s…a happy person to be around.” Not a second after Tanya’s second bowl of soup was empty, there were three waiters at the table, all red-jacketed livery and white gloves, one to clear the soup bowls and one each to bring the main course. Those plates were so hot the steam was rising off them. Erich’s personal theory was that was why their food was so expensive. The restaurant maintained an endless stream of freshly-produced meals so nothing had to be served cold, no matter how much or little time passed between courses. Erich allowed Tanya to cut into one of the medallions of meat populating her plate - she wisely chose the delicate scallop first so it didn’t get cold - to turn the uncomfortable question back on her. In the meantime, he chose one of his potato dishes to try first, and pulled the pommes duchesse in front of him. “Your turn,” he said, raising a forkful of crusted golden-brown to his mouth. She cocked her head to the side. “Serebryakov.” “She’s a highly capable person,” Tanya nodded. “That hardly needs an explanation.” “It does unless you’re expecting she’ll be your adjutant again two years from now.” “N-not necessarily,” Tanya coughed. “Then it isn’t that. You’re surrounded by enough highly capable people as it is.” The cut he made into his potatoes - the hasselbacked ones this time - was too firm, and his knife clacked into the plate’s china. Another damage to add to his tab. “No easy answers for you either.” Tanya was silent long enough that the scallop was remembered only by its striped pink shell, and she was halfway through the light brown round of veal. “She meets me where I am,” Tanya finally nodded to herself. “She accepts I’ve made my choices on who I want to be and finds a way to make that work.” Tanya chewed some more, and when he didn’t interrupt, went on, her usual terseness put aside to philosophize. “I’m not saying she never argues,” Tanya laughed. “But it’s to tell me I’ve picked the wrong dress, not the wrong life. It’s relaxing to be around.” “Fair enough,” Erich sighed. Maybe that was why Serebryakov’s approach was more successful than his. She didn’t make her goodwill conditional on change. Changes weren’t presented as anything more than a helpful suggestion to take, or not, at Tanya’s discretion. “Sorry,” he went on. “That I’m not...” She looked up, the quirk in her left lip an indication she was amused he’d think to apologize. “It’s different,” she agreed. “I have reasons for trying to see it your way rather than expecting it to be the other way around all the time.” Erich nodded, and just as suddenly as the meal of potatoes had seemed necessary, they weren’t. It felt wrong to hold his position over her, except it was all he had. So long as it made Tanya try to see it his way, that was all he asked. Nonetheless, his meal of potatoes was what he had. He dove into the last of them the, pommes Anna. “It’s sad, really,” Tanya continued. “Visha was conscripted. Got injured in the course of duty. And this spring some time she’ll be done in the hospital and get dumped out without a thank-you.” She considered for a moment. “That kind of story will really hurt recruitment,” she said, leaning back to cross her arms. “People need to believe they’ll be appropriately rewarded for their efforts or it all falls apart.” “We don’t have the money to help everyone,” he sighed, to Tanya’s worry there would be no one to fight another war. “If we have to, we just conscript them again anyway.” “Not anymore,” she said sharply, bordering on angrily. “You can’t do that anymore.” “Not for a standing army,” he nodded. “But if we have to for an immediate need, it’s still perfectly possible.” “I - that’s…” Tanya quickly swallowed her first bite of tenderloin, and he saw her knuckles whiten on her silverware. “That’s not what it sounded like. All the papers made it seem that was all over with, and I thought - I never realized-,” She blew her breath out slowly as a bid to calm what Lehrgen could tell was a sudden emotional spike. “About Serebryakov,” he moved them along, thinking back to how long it had been since he’d said something so utterly stupid in Tanya’s presence that was guaranteed to send her mind off into places he didn’t want it going. “Did you have any ideas?” Tanya brought herself back to the present. She shook her head and cut another slice of meat, then thought better of it and pushed it away. Half a glass of water went in its place. “I’d been thinking whether Visha could live with me,” she said. “It might be better for her to stay in the city than get stuck out in the country. She won’t make anything of herself that way.” Briefly, an image of Elya strangling him for allowing Serebryakov’s life to be further dictated by Tanya conjured itself into the forefront of his mind. “I - umm-,” he started, wishing he’d ordered them wine. “I do feel her predicament is a bit my fault. I can’t help everyone, but for a year or two I suppose it isn’t too much to ask that I cover an apartment for her. If living independently is what she wants.” Tanya looked at him in question. “She’s got to be - what - in her mid-twenties? Most women her age are looking to get married sooner than later.” Tanya’s gaze narrowed so far it was as though she didn’t understand what he was getting at in the least. “There’s nothing wrong with not wanting a career,” he argued, because he doubted Serebryakov would do it for herself, if a husband was what she’d rather. She’d have no trouble finding one. “Plenty of people don’t.” “Plenty of women,” Tanya corrected spitefully. “All I’m saying is to put my offer on the table,” he replied. “Don’t make her take it. But if she does want to, you two can pick something suitable out for her.” “Good enough,” Tanya sighed. From there, the conversation managed to devolve into simpler subjects, against the odds. For all the time they’d known each other, they’d never made each other’s proper acquaintance. Some of her answers to the banal meet-and-greet questionnaire they defaulted back to didn’t surprise him - her favorite color, for example, was a very similar green to the dye of Imperial uniforms. Others did. Her favorite flower was a camellia. The answer was less surprising than the fact she had an answer ready to give in the first place. Eventually, their mostly-finished plates were exchanged for dessert menus. “I prefer to drink my dessert,” he said. “Order what you want, though.” She did, and he put in an order for Sauternnes a second year in a row. “1893 was a good year for them,” he joked. “The world knew I was coming and got ready.” She laughed, but her attention was elsewhere. Erich turned to look where she was, at the children being escorted out by women in black-and-white nanny uniforms. He checked his watch. It read close to ten-thirty, which meant the clock had struck ten. “Why are there kids here?” she whispered. “I’ve been wondering all night.” “I’m sure many people had the same question about you,” he laughed. “I expected you’d be sympathetic.” “Those are actual kids.” “And you weren’t?” She rolled her eyes. “It’s different.” “If you say so.” “So why are they here?” He heaved a great sigh. This was among the list of things he wasn’t used to having to explain. “Christmas is a family holiday,” he began. “New Year’s is the opposite.” She nodded along. “But they’re close enough that you’re usually going to be in the same place for both,” he told her. “So what you have to understand is that when you’re the kind of family that can afford a table here, a membership at a club, something like that…everyone knows about arranged marriages, but the truth is, that’s just another part of your arranged relationships.” Their dessert came then. At her first sip of Sauternnes, he could see she was enamored. “I - this - I love-,” she caught herself, a happy smile and tinge of red gracing her cheeks. “Thank you, if I forget to say it again.” He accepted her pleasantry graciously, making a mock bow from his seat. “When you grow up on an estate you don’t meet many friends by proximity,” he explained. “Literally, your parents arrange your friendships with the right people. This club started off more for that crowd. Thirty years ago, everyone in Berun that mattered would have brought their kids to show off their Christmas presents to each other and meet the next generation.” He leaned over and grabbed a single forkful of the plum dumplings he’d wanted to try the year before from Tanya’s plate. “Nowadays, times have changed,” he said. “This is more often an escape-your-family event than the alternative. But it is still billed for families. If I’d known ahead of time you’d be here I’d have told Wechter he could bring along the whole clan.” Too soon, the last plate was being cleared off the table. “I guess we better get back to it,” he sighed. “I wish I didn’t have to,” she replied. She stood up, and immediately winced. “Are you-,” “You get used to standing in these shoes,” she griped. “Then you sit down, and when you stand up again, you feel everything you’d been ignoring.” For a moment, he tried to sympathize, and then another thought struck him. “Don’t you all have some kind of…pain elimination spell?” She rolled her eyes. “Sure, if you can concentrate on making complex calculus equations in your head while you’re going about everything else.” “Alright,” he agreed. “Sorry. I just thought you had a way to solve that.” “If you want to buy me an orb, sure,” she winked. “Let’s head out and see if there’s a jeweler still open somewhere in the city.” He rolled his eyes back at her and they parted ways. The third time he went to check on her, about an hour after they finished eating, he found her at the edge of the dance floor, leaned back stubbornly against the force of the man who had his hand on her arm and was trying to tug her along. Of course it would be Bruno, the one person in the room who had about as high a risk tolerance as Tanya. According to himself, at least. "Leave her be," Erich admonished, separating the two and pulling Bruno aside. "Unless you're feeling especially brave." “She wasn’t going to hit me,” he argued. “I didn’t think.” “That’s not what I’m talking about,” Erich sighed, visions of one or both of them ending up in the hospital when Tanya inevitably tripped over her own feet dancing through his head. "I thought the idea was to make her seem a less menacing character," Bruno replied with good humor. "If she's here to help her climb the ranks, she needs people to think her refined instead of savage." "Well, that's why she thinks she's here," Lehrgen agreed. "Personally, I'm hoping she'll agree to become something other than my officer one day." Bruno’s eyes lit up with a gleam of insatiable curiosity. Surely, on account of Otto, Bruno had been apprised of their rivalry, how Erich used to want her removed from the Army, if not the planet. And Bruno liked nothing more than the drama of a good rivalry. “Don’t mention anything to her, please,” he warned. “It’s too early to say how this’ll go. And Zettour might actually have me killed for this shit. He was the one that raised her up, and I think to this day he thinks everyone should come get his blessing before they do anything with her. So unless you want to explain it to Otto at my funeral, I’d appreciate you don’t go around talking.” “You know,” Bruno said, reaching a hand out to put on Erich’s shoulder. “Your brother always tells me that between the two of you, you’re the more interesting one. Didn’t really believe him until now.” Bruno clapped his hand down twice. “You’re a brave man.” “I’ll never hear the end of it from Otto,” Erich groaned, already picturing the various ways his brother would find to make him eat his words when he found out Erich had done something to help Tanya. “Never.” “I’m glad I met her,” Bruno said, looking back in her direction. “Normally I’d say playing games with a girl that age is a bit low. She - ahh - she seems like she can more than hold her own.” “More being the operative word,” Erich grumbled. “And in the end, it’s because - I don’t know. It’s a shame if she never has a life outside the Army. For her, for me, for the country or the rest of the world, maybe.” “I suppose I can let you play the hero in this story,” Bruno winked. “I’ll do my part. I can at least circulate it around we should be talking to her about more than her job.” “Thanks,” he said, feeling sorry for every time he thought Bruno annoying. “Thanks Bruno. Really.” “Anyway, it’s a bit confusing bringing Wechter along,” Bruno frowned. “It seems like they’re here for the same reason.” “That can’t be helped.” “All I’m saying is bring her on her own once in a while.” Erich nodded with a sigh. “Eventually.” “Besides, you can’t keep her from dancing with other people forever,” Bruno joked. He gave Erich a friendly smack to the upper arm. “Not if you want her fit for society at large.” “That’s true,” he smiled. “Just not tonight.” When he turned, Tanya was still waiting patiently for him to return, probably so she could hear what types of threats he’d made to Bruno for daring to treat her like a normal girl, and decide if they were sufficient. “You will have to learn one day, you realize,” he told her. “If you’d like, I know of one person who’d be happy to teach you.” Even better than having a friend who would teach her, Erich had someone he felt nothing but personal enmity for in mind. The thought of Klaus Hornig having a professional crisis over his inability to reform Tanya into a graceful lady was so delightful it counted as a Christmas gift to himself. She hesitated. “Maybe one day. After I’ve got stairs down.” He checked his watch again with a short laugh. The hour hand was marching steadily towards the top of the circle. “It’s late enough everyone’s had too much to drink,” he said. “You might want to…let’s get you a cab.” He helped her in, leaned in long enough to catch eyes with the driver and make it clear Erich was memorizing his face in case he wanted to try something that would require a police report because he’d found himself alone with a young girl that’d probably had a drink or two, and then it was over. He went back in, found Bruno, and two shots of whiskey apiece. This coming year, all his work was going to pay off, and he’d be ready to face the future. Next Christmas, he was going to be introducing Otto to the woman he was going to marry. He could feel it. 




 

 Send Nudes






 
 "How can a woman be expected to be happy with a man who insists on treating her as if she were a perfectly normal human being?"
 
 
 
 
 December 27, 1931Upper East Side, Manhattin, New Yourke City, Unified States of America
 
The tickle of lace under Otto's fingers brought his world down to his wife. In an instant, there were no bills, no children, no work, neither taxis honking nor subway brakes screeching, no city, no Unified States, no Empire, no world at all beyond Margarete and the wet bar in their home's smoking room. He took two glasses out of the cabinet, movements in time to the music he'd put on. A small pour of raspberry-infused Conhac went into the bottom of each coupe. As dramatically as he could, he uncorked the best bottle of Champaigne he had in there - the Pol Roger - moving his feet all the while. Margarete was partial to the variation on a blanc-cassis he was making. He was partial to whatever put her in the right mood. After three children, it was getting hard to remember the last time he'd seen her undressed when it wasn't to use the toilet before her bath. That one out-of-focus picture he'd snagged of her on their honeymoon was the glue holding their romance together most times. How he envied his brother, most nights, he who lived in a version of reality where women appeared unclothed for one reason only. Tonight? Tonight he was happy to be no one other than Otto von Lehrgen, husband to Margarete von Lehrgen, whose hand took his to pull him close and dance suggestively along to the rhythm pulsing out of the room's Victrola. She stepped forward, he went back; she stepped forward, he went back; each call and response of hands and feet and hips guided by the tempo of the brass band in the background. Dark, dark brown strands of her hair came out of the clip holding it as she went, and he barely kept himself from catching onto it and giving up his teasing, because he knew as soon as her equally-dark eyes began smoldering like hot coals it would be over, very quickly, and he had a mind to make it last. Music playing over the dampening cloak of ash from the fireplace transported them to a private room at a bar, business taken care of and pleasures of smoke and drink awaiting, a friendly waitress in front of him offering more than what was on the night's menu. "I hate to turn down a pretty young thing like you," he said, voice dropped as low as he could make it. He lifted a hand to her chest and brushed his fingers just below the hollow of her throat, where her milk-white skin was exposed, then gently pushed her away. "But, my dear, I'm a married man. I'm afraid I must refuse." "Oh, but Mr. von Lehrgen," Margarete breathed out, purposefully heaving her buxom chest, her own voice pitched high and innocent. It was the one she used for playing new girl at the office. Better, even, than a waitress act. "I hear your wife doesn't quite provide you all the services you require. Isn't that what you hired me for?" "My wife is a faithful mother to three children," he said. His hand went to cup her cheek. Her red lipstick smudged on his thumb where it pressed against her mouth. "My only use for other women is to fulfill my business needs." Her hand took his and dragged it low then lower, down until there was nothing in his mind besides the weight of what was trapped in slightly-too-tight lace. "Tell her I only wanted to wrap my hands around your big…p-portfolio." The choice of terminology took his fingertips away from their happy occupation to go explore his forehead. He cleared his throat to keep from laughing. "C'mon Margarete, you can do better than that," he muttered. "You hear enough of my calls. There's only one of them, not a diverse collection of assets." He put his mind back to swaying with the music and got them rearranged to set the tone again. "I'm awaiting delivery of…of a long bond," she stuttered. There was no helping it. He'd laugh himself out of the mood if he let her try again. For a brief instant he turned away, one finger held in the air so she'd wait for him to recover and not make it worse. With a sigh of "Oh, Margarete," he refocused. It was the thought that counted. The scandalized gasp she gave when he popped open the first few buttons on her blouse was only half-faked, he thought. A scene from some poorly-written magazine feature he'd been desperate enough to read floated through his mind. "It seems I cannot ignore your temptations," he said. The solemn seriousness with which he acted out the line became increasingly difficult to maintain with each word. "I have been seduced." It was her that broke character this time, to look at the floor until she could look at him without laughing. The way she bit her lip to hold it back when she did meet his eyes fit the picture well enough for him. He topped off their glasses and raised his to clink against hers without sparing much more than a glance away from what he'd been looking at for the last minute. They finished the Champaigne while they danced the opposite direction they'd started, him stepping forward, her back, sometimes twirling a half-turn so he had to step around the other side to chase her. "On your desk?" she asked, perfect, doe-eyed disbelief mimed on her face, the deep wells of her eyes drinking him up. "We'll mess up all that paperwork I did for you." Her hand landed behind her on the table and brushed the contents off. There was paperwork there, actually. Their children disliked the smell of smoke, and wouldn't come find him for every small thing in there, where it hung heavy off the plush intimacy of the men's lounge room, the way they would when he was in his office of sunlight and windows. "I can't take you to bed, my dear. My wife might catch us." The bad acting stopped, then, because he'd lifted her up on the table and there was no more script, no more music, no more anything besides buttons and belts and bare skin and them, the way they used to be before- "DAD!" Children. "Dad!" Anne's voice sounded again, closer this time. She was both unstoppable in her quest to deny him any modicum of privacy, and, at eleven years old, too old to believe the stories they used to tell her when she took advantage of Gunter's chaotic energy to escape their distracted nanny and come find him and Margarete. Margarete was laughing, now, with no attempt made to hide it. She was laughing because she had it easy, only had to rearrange her clothes a bit to look presentable. Otto took a seat on the other side of the table from the door. Anne's head popped through a second later, with too much exuberance for the hour, which was past her bedtime, little blonde halo of bedhead and gap-toothed smile making her look far more innocent than she was. "Hey dad." "Hi Anne." She looked around the room as she stepped in, white nightdress still curled in her fists where she'd hiked it up to run. "What are you doing?" "Mommy and I were having a drink together." "Oh. Can I try a sip?" "No. You can go to bed." Her left heel lifted off the ground, ball pressed firmly into the floor, twisting back and forth in the guilty tell she made when she knew she'd done something she shouldn't have. "You got a phone call," she said, addressing the corner of the room and not him. "Anneliese, you know you're not supposed to answer the phone." "No one else was answering it!" she said with a dramatic huff. She let go of her nightgown to cross her arms, then stomped her foot for good measure. Otto's biggest mistake since moving to the Unified States was, without a doubt, buying a home where the previous owner had wired the place with more than a single receiver. He'd thought it very futuristic at the time. Now, he was constantly menaced by the phone in the upstairs hall. He might have to go rip the damn thing out of the wall. Anne's obsession with listening to his calls was one part endearing, because she'd come down after and try to make sense of what he did for work. It also meant Otto couldn't have a proper conversation with anyone until he'd gotten someone else in the household to track his daughter down. Either way, her version of the story, no one else was answering, was false, and no one sprinted to get it before I did was closer to the truth. The housekeeper would have picked up in due time. "Who is it?" Otto sighed. "Bruno." "Tell Bruno he can call back tomorrow," Margarete chimed in. "Okay." "Hold on, Anne," Otto called to the long blonde braid swinging across her turned back. He looked guiltily at Margarete. "Bruno never calls unless it's important." His friend moved around too much to too many places without modern technology to make social calls feasible. He wrote frequently. Bothering to find and pay for a line he reserved for special occasions. "I always knew one day he'd call to tell you he's lost all the money you've given him on some stupid bet," Margarete said, a finger shaking with angry vigor in his direction. "Most of my money he has is money he's made. He didn't have that much to begin with." He wished his voice wouldn't rise in response to hers doing it, not in front of Anne, who he was belatedly realizing was glancing between them blue eyes as big as her mother's and rounded with concern. He turned to look at her and forced a smile he didn't feel. Thinking too much about how Bruno made his money inevitably led to him wondering how many local conflicts he'd unknowingly funded. "It's nothing, honey," he reassured Anne. "You go find out if we still have a roof over our head, and if the answer is yes, you know where to find me," his wife hissed. With that, Margarete ushered Anne away and upstairs. Otto stewed in aggravated silence a moment more, then went to his office to see what had warranted the call. He picked up the phone and down the line came a voice better suited to stadium announcements than late-night calls. "Where are you?" Otto asked. "Berun." Otto checked his watch and did some math he didn't like the result of. It was four in the morning, and something was keeping Bruno up. "Why on Earth are you not asleep?" "Oh, my sleep schedule is all kinds of mixed up. That's all." When Otto pressed him if that was really all, what he got back was the variety of less-than-believable stories Bruno typically populated his letters with: he got an update on the rivalries of every last tribe from the Levant down through the Arabian peninsula, featuring the narrator as a main character in many; he was informed riding a camel wasn't as glamorous as it sounded; he was treated to a foreign version of yodeling that Bruno swore was an exact rendition of the calls to prayer he heard every day. Once Bruno's chatter veered off of himself and onto daily news headlines, the fear really set in. Bruno never wanted to talk about the news more than himself. He was stalling. The sweat under Otto's collar turned cold; the jitter of his hands was no longer anticipatory, but anxious; his breath labored with painful and not pleasant tightness. He stood up to turn the light off, as though hiding in the dark would help. "Bruno," he groaned. "My wife is waiting for me upstairs. I swear to God if she's asleep and this isn't good, I'm not talking to you until next year." "That's in like, five days." He wanted to grab Bruno's hair through the phone and shake him until the secret spilled out. "You know what I mean. Next next year." The other end of the call went silent for half a minute. Whatever it was had enough power to temporarily mute Bruno. "Have you…have you talked to your brother recently?" Otto jerked involuntarily out of the protective curl he'd been huddled in. The last time news about Erich had warranted a four in the morning interruption to his life was when his nanny had woken him up to take him far enough away he wouldn't hear their mother screaming. Mostly, he remembered crying himself because they'd passed the doctor on the stairs and Otto hadn't realized the man wasn't there to poke and prod at him. "Two days ago," he told Bruno. "Why?" "I think he's hit his head. Quite badly." Otto groaned in sympathy. Erich could afford to lose a few brain cells. Having Bruno visit you in the hospital was a punishment no one deserved. All he did was recount stories of his own injuries, which were invariably much worse and earned in much manlier ways. "Alright," Otto yawned, all his tension evaporating into sleepiness. "Thanks for telling me. Is it serious serious? Like he's going to have to come live with me serious?" "Maybe to get away from old General von Zettour. I mean, you do know who he's trying to date?" Otto sighed. He didn't hear much about Elise. She's fine. Things are going. Stop asking. I'll tell you when there's something worth knowing. Still, he heard about her. He didn't know why Zettour cared all that much, unless Zettour had some unpolitic opinions for the Imperial unity they professed to aim for. "How do you know?" Otto shot back. "He brought her to the Christmas thing." "Oh," Otto said. "He didn't tell me he was doing that. That probably means he's planning on proposing." Understandably, Bruno made a noise of confusion. Otto did his best to explain. Out loud, he blamed Marian. She was an easy enough culprit. Marian was to blame, he thought, for Erich being too afraid of her disapproval to do much beyond what people expected him to do. It was Otto himself, he knew, who'd made it so when Erich did decide he was going to do something unreasonable, he didn't tell anyone until after it was done. More than twenty years ago, Erich had let slip a secret. He'd wanted to brag, Otto thought. Brag to the older brother fond of teasing him for being shy around girls. Erich had gotten Franceska Nowak a job at a house in Berun down the road from their family's. Otto hadn't been unsympathetic. Too sympathetic, maybe. He knew Erich well enough to know if he had someone easy to fall back on, he'd remain stuck forever not doing the difficult job of committing to anyone else. Every woman their parents sent his way would wait in limbo while he tried to puzzle out the nonexistent perfect choice, Franceska his insulation from realizing many of those choices were at least better than none at all. Otto had told their parents. He'd been man enough to confess it to Erich over drinks the same day. His brother hadn't gotten mad, had sat swallowing his disappointment for a few minutes then sighed and agreed it had been a reasonable thing for Otto to do. Ever after, whenever he had his mind made up about things people had opinions on, he let you know after there was nothing you could do to stop him. Fat lot of good it had done in the end. Last Otto had heard, Franceska was married to some dance instructor and Erich had so far remained committed to being non-committal. "So," Bruno interjected, after Otto had given him the gist of Erich's personality quirks. "You did know, just not about the party?" "I did," Otto confirmed. "I know she's an odd choice for an officer's wife, but what am I going to do? Lecture him about Preussland? He cares more about that crap than I do." "You knew." "Yes." "You knew," Bruno stressed, already-loud voice rising in accusation. "Y-yes?" "You knew your brother had it bad for Tanya Degurechaff and you didn't tell me? Otto. How could you do this to me?" Otto laughed so loud at the absurdity of Bruno's mistaken impression he put his hand on the earpiece for a few seconds so he could listen for investigatory footsteps coming down the stairs without hearing other noise. "Bruno," he said, humor still lacing his voice. "Are you sure you didn't hit your head?" "I swear it on my mother's grave." Frankly, Otto wasn't sure Bruno cared what happened to his mother's grave. Regardless, whatever he thought he'd seen, he was wrong. "Bruno, I know my brother, and I'm telling you, that's impossible. If he brought her, it was for some other reason, and someone else probably made him do it." "That's what we all thought at first," Bruno said. Otto could all but hear him crossing his arms through the phone. "They came with someone else from work and all. But he told me different. Said he'd never hear the end of it from you, either." The conversation devolved into another long-winded story of Bruno's, this one altogether less credible than his usual flights of fancy. He recounted the threat he'd been given, doing a remarkably good imitation of Erich's clipped, snappy tone, the same one that all the lifers got drilled into them, still overlain with the hint of higher vowels that haunted his speech from their native dialect. For a long while, Otto listened to it like Bruno was describing an entirely different man who so happened to share some surface similarities with his brother. There was no way he was describing the same person Otto knew, the boy who'd gotten a dictionary for his tenth birthday he'd barely been strong enough to lift and couldn't have been happier, who used to go hunting bugs with Werner to trap so they'd fight and then let them go as soon as they actually started, the boy who'd stand on the outside of conversations making such pathetic help faces Otto couldn't deny them, no matter that he'd known it would be better to make Erich learn to do it himself. Since he'd been old enough to understand why boys wanted to marry girls and not their best friends, all Erich had ever wanted was a person he didn't have to try for. Whoever Tanya Degurechaff was, she wasn't that. One by one, Otto lifted his fingers off his desk and tapped them back down, like a slow drumroll to marshal up his thoughts. He saw Bruno's point. If the story really went as Bruno said. There was little you could take on faith from him, and this certainly didn't qualify. "Don't tell him I told you," Bruno made him promise. Otto said he wouldn't, fully intending on breaking it tomorrow at the earliest possible convenience. What have you gotten yourself into? he wondered across the ocean and half the landmass of Europa, feet trudging up the stairs. No matter what Erich was up to, he sounded like he was in over his head. Another two steps and he was on the landing. By the time he was opening his bedroom door, he was near to forgetting his brother's very existence. Margarete was still awake, undressed down to lace. In almost the same moment Otto wondered if maybe it was all true, and Erich liked the same things he did, because last he'd heard Elise sounded somewhat similar in appearance to Margarete, his wife sighed her pretty, intentionally frustrated sigh. "Important meeting, boss?" Shirt halfway over his head, he couldn't tell her to stop, stop, stop, because - "I hope you've brought back something hard for me." He untangled himself from his shirt, spun around, and sat on the edge of the bed facing away from Margarete. "Otto?" she asked. She leaned close, sent a hand to rub at his shoulder. "Are you alright?" "Yes. No. Yes. You can't do office girl anymore." He heard her flop down on her side of the bed. He couldn't see her pout, but he could picture it. "I liked that one." "I know," he said. "I know, it's just…" He groaned, face cradled in his hands. After all these years, Erich had gotten his revenge on Otto for stealing away his good times with Franceska. And with another low-class blonde from somewhere out east, to boot. He turned to his wife to make his confession. "I won't be able to stop thinking about my brother." 
 xXx 
Oh come on, Erich von Lehrgen encouraged the deadbolt on his front door. His telephone was ringing in the hall. There were no more than five meters separating him from it, five meters and a lock frozen by the cold into stubborn resistance. He tried again, jammed the key in as far as it went, turned so hard he wasn't sure if the metal would snap first or his thumb, sharp pain blooming on his finger pad where cold brass pressed too deep into skin. Nothing. The second ring sounded, an echoing, high-pitched brrrr muffled by wood and stone. It had to be work. No one would suspect he was home on time besides the people who'd seen him leave. He'd have to tell Klaus he couldn't make it for dinner, after all. With a sigh, Erich made himself try the door again, more deliberately this time, like he had all the time in the world and not two more rings until Romel put someone else in charge of whatever the emergency is. Erich slid the key in once more. Before he turned it, he leaned the full weight of his eighty-odd kilograms against the door, used his right shoulder to push in and up, and then he felt it, the lethargic pull of the bolt retreating through the faceplate. As soon as the five centimeters of metal he was fighting cleared the frame, the force of his push turned into forward momentum. He nearly ended up face-first on the washed-out green of the foyer's rug. Without turning to retrieve his keyring - he expected he'd be locking up again in less than a minute - he regained his balance and was off to catch the phone halfway into its final ring. "Hello?" he answered, out-of-breath and still shaken up from his near miss. Maybe he should go on and get a full-time housekeeper like all the other men his rank had. It was his brother's voice he heard on the other end, wondering why he was panting. That was more worrisome than work. They'd spoken just three days ago. Erich had better close his door and settle in. "Sorry," he apologized. His hands went to undo some of the buttons on his neck. "I thought you might be - ahh - a colleague. Hold on a minute." It was slightly more than a minute. The key didn't want to come out, now, and he dipped into his office to make a note to call a locksmith to get it replaced so he didn't forget, again, for the third winter in a row. "A colleague," Otto repeated back to him in a cough. It made Erich pat around in his pocket to find a cigarette of his own. "Anyone in particular?" Erich pondered the question while he got a match out. Not Ernst, he'd driven Erich home. Maybe Wechter, maybe Romel's adjutant, maybe Little Miss I'd take your job if I could finding an opportunity to do just that. "Tanya, probably," he concluded. He sighed out a puff of smoke. For all the progress she'd made, he saw no sign she was ready to give up taking advantage of loopholes, like taking command after a courtesy call to check off the box that her superior officer was missing in action. "That's the call I wouldn't have wanted to miss, at least." Otto wheezed, and Erich took the cigarette out of his mouth, barely two breaths into it. Tanya might be right about not liking them. The research was they temporarily reduced lung capacity, which was why they'd been forbidden to high-flying, thin-air-breathing mages during active duty. From the sounds of it, Otto was suffering worse side effects from twenty years of the stuff. "About her," Otto said, recovering enough to get the words out. "About her. Bruno…ahh…he told me everything." The cigarette was back in Erich's mouth a second later. He'd known Otto would never let him hear the end of it, known all along there was no way the man who'd threatened to name his next child Tanya so there was another one to talk about would let it pass unremarked-upon when he heard Erich was trying to help her, in his own way. Back years ago, when things were going in her favor and it had seemed like his fate might end up being a cog in the machine that would grind the planet to dust in her never-ending vision of world war, he hadn't known where else to turn to confess his unpatriotic fears - and his inadequacy at overcoming them - other than his family. His silence had drawn out enough there was no way Otto wouldn't understand his displeasure. "Otto," he said. His tone was carefully controlled. Dissonantly cheerful, even. "If you called just to make fun of me for changing my mind, you can hang up. You aren't the first person to tell me I'm being an idiot about her, and I'm sure you won't be the last." It was a good thing for him - a very good thing - Volkenhein or Wrangell hadn't been given Schleichel's position. They hated her more than he ever had. Without Zettour or Rudersdorf to protect him, he'd earn a demerit for each positive thing he mentioned about her, no matter how small, and she'd have had no choice but to jump ship straight for Romel. These days, Elya was his main concern as far as defending himself from accusations he was being too soft. Marian would voice them too. "N-no," Otto said, rushed and contrite, as close as Erich was likely to hear to an apology for being unsympathetic. "No. That's not it. But you know Bruno. He could have made the whole thing up, like I suspect he did with other tales he told me when he called. You…you have changed your opinion on her, then?" "Yes. No. I don't know." Admitting he was wrong to Otto was the worst. He could hear how defensive his tone was becoming, wondered when he'd finally grow out of that, thought probably never. "Don't get the wrong impression." He turned away and leaned against the thin console the phone's base sat on while he listened to the quiet laugh come from across the ocean, an ahh, I knew Bruno was lying. There was a mirror above the table, a mirror that he didn't want to see himself staring back out of. Not for a bit. "I don't know if it'll work," he said softly. Smoke spread out above him when he tilted his head back and blew fragmented wisps of hope out. He was getting ahead of himself. "Maybe all I'll find is she's fit for nothing but service. I'm more seeing if she's capable of real change than saying she's changed, that's all." For once, Otto said nothing back. No taunts, no jokes. It was a sort of foolproof trick Erich had learned for earning respectful contemplation from his brother, wearing weakness and indecision on his chest like a badge of honor. "It's only…" he started anew. Forty-odd hours ago, he'd seen a girl in a chair, slightly slumped, moderately worn down, completely the same as anyone else after hours of greeting strangers, completely different from the force of nature she'd been when she was in familiar territory, constant and inexorable as waves breaking against the shore. "I'm in her world, most of the time, it feels like." Erich tapped his cigarette twice on his fingers, and the ash went to singe the rug with tiny dots of gray-black. The smile on his lips, the smugness lacing his voice, it wasn't right, he knew, except nothing about this had from the start, with an eight-year-old in officer's training. "If I pull her into my world, though, once the uniform's gone, she behaves more like how you'd expect for an eighteen year old girl. She's still smart, still frighteningly eager, but she's inexperienced. And a bit nervous, I think." Two more taps, and two more piles of ash drifted to the floor. "It's the only shot I'll have at getting her her to think about what else there is to do with her life, really think, before she's locked back on her course and it's bloodlust leading her around again, or whatever the hell compelled her to be so…well, you know. Impossible to pin down for a second to stick some brakes on." Otto said nothing again, only Erich could tell his hand was over the receiver, probably to give some girl his lunch order. It would be right the right time for it, over there. "Have you? Yet?" he asked when that was done. "I wish," Erich laughed. Tanya didn't give up and settle down that easy. "I wish. Then I could focus on getting things wrapped up with Elise." "E-Elise? She's still in the picture?" Erich frowned. He spun back to look at himself, tilted his chin up, down, frowned deeper. There, in the middle of his head, towards the back, was a new gray hair. After what he'd been through, he should be glad there were few enough to keep track of. He wasn't. "Did I say she wasn't?" he asked. "Sorry," Otto said, sarcastic and amused with something. Himself, probably. He usually was. "I guess I thought with you off trying to seduce she-Grendel, you'd have your hands full." How Erich hadn't seen this coming, he wasn't sure. Last year, last year when Otto made the joke about Marian, he should've known there was no line he wouldn't cross. "Otto, please," he groaned. "Just this once. Have some respect." "Oh, excuse me, Medea." Thumb and forefinger pinched the bridge of Erich's nose while he shut his eyes. Trying not to rise to the challenge, because that would simply encourage Otto. Trying, too, to forget a day might come when Tanya aimed to get her way the way only a woman could, because that would mean she'd found new powers to wield against them all. He gave a short snort of laughter. He had called her she-Grendel once. He'd forgotten some of the more inventive descriptions he'd used for her. "Anyway," he coughed. "It's not like Elise has anything to worry about from Tanya." "I doubt she sees it that way." "Otto," he warned. Nonetheless, he smiled around his cigarette, just a little. "I have no intention of marrying Tanya. Elise knows that. So do you." "Christ," Otto muttered. "Okay." Erich realized his mistake immediately, winced that he'd said the word. Now, Otto wouldn't let up on him until he was in receipt of an invitation. "So you've made up your mind about her then?" he asked. "No," Erich retracted. "I'm saying the possibility's there. I haven't made up my mind." "I feel like you have and you're just refusing to tell me." The heat from the end of Erich's cigarette was beginning to warm the ends of his fingers. He stamped it out and smiled at himself in the mirror, knowing how foolish he was being. To Otto, he only gave a noncommittal grunt of acknowledgement. His brother had already pulled one admission of fault out of him. He was hardly going to allow him a second. "How are you going to explain it to Marian, anyway? About Tanya. She will find out." Since the beginning, it had only been a matter of time, he'd known, until Marian accused him of aiding and abetting the enemy. Now that he'd publicly presented Tanya as an officer going places that merit alone couldn't take her to the people who could help her get there, word would get to Marian. To top it off, he'd done it while employing underage labor to assist the military. Again. "Well," Erich sighed. "She is eighteen now, at least. She's not a kid." He wasn't sure what to call the noise Otto made in response. A laugh of some kind, neither happy nor forced, a partly-crazed giggle of a sort. "I'm not going to lecture you," he said. "But even I wouldn't be dumb enough to try that excuse on Marian." Annoyingly, Erich couldn't quite pace with the phone in hand. He did the next best thing and walked himself in a circle, then back, cord curling and uncurling around him. "Otto," he said, switching into what his brother referred to as his lecture-voice. "I don't call you and tell you how to do your job, hmm? I don't tell you to raise your kids differently. This isn't your business; it's mine. If I want your help I'll ask for it." "I'm trying to help," Otto nearly shouted into the phone, and it was the strain in it that caught Erich, the similarity to the way Klaus had asked after whether everything was alright with him a month ago. "This is sudden. It feels more desperate and drastic than coherent thinking. I'm worried about you. Can you not see that?" "I've spent the last ten years worried about myself," he yelled back, untwisting himself to slam a hand down on the table in front of him, though he knew Otto wouldn't hear it. "Ten years. I finally feel like I see a path out. Getting closer to the source of the trouble than I ever meant to seems insane, I know. But can you just let me have this one?" "I-," Otto began, ready to fight. His voice died into resignation instead. "Nn. Fuck. Alright." "Thank you," Erich breathed out, sarcastic and sincere in equal measure. It was because they'd never met someone like Tanya, he knew, that Otto and Klaus couldn't understand. She could be insane in a rational way, or rational in an insane way, he'd never been sure which it was. He was sure it consumed her, completely, when she let it take her, which she would if nothing stopped it. There was evidence enough for that strewn in the bones buried across their borderlands. It saturated the ink-black strike-throughs of her officially-available records, haunted the recordings they pulled off her orbs, colored the testimony of people who'd heard her call artillery strikes through her own unit's positions. It was still there under the surface most times, sometimes in her voice, sometimes only in her eyes, and nothing more. Some stupid thing of Nietze's came to him about battling with monsters, and it was easy to see what Klaus and Otto must, a sort of all-consuming rational-insanity of his own. It was the only way to fight back that he knew of, and he had to fight, had to pull back against the tide, because he knew how easy it would be for her to push the Romel-Schliechel-Zettour dominoes in her direction. She could almost do it accidentally. For everyone's sake, hers included, this time, since she'd shown a surprising willingness to allow herself to be stopped - or at least redirected - he'd let it consume him. "I'm almost sad you'll never meet her," he muttered, breaking the expensive silence between him and his brother. This call was on Otto's bill, at least. "Then you'd…" "Erich?" Otto asked, almost like it was to himself, an idea coming to him from the blue. "I will drop it, I swear. Only…you have spent a good bit of those worried ten years wrapped up in Tanya's…drama. You sure you'll be able to send her away when the time comes?" The grip he still had on the console tightened against his will, Otto striking a sore spot leftover from the beginning of the war. The anxious obsession, as Zettour had called it, borne out of being the only person insistent Tanya wasn't a new breed of soldier but something else entirely. He'd been right, in the end, with how she'd poison the well with her aftertaste. No one had ever apologized for not listening. "If that happens, you have my permission to hit me the next time you see me," he laughed. He'd wanted a normal life back for so long he had a hard time picturing it anymore. He saw Otto's point, in that sense. Except that normal was the default state; it would be more like relaxing an overstrained muscle than walking again after a long bedrest, he thought. The part of his life occupied by Otto recovered quickly back to its own normal state after its bout of seriousness. Erich hung up as soon as he could after his brother switched to wondering aloud whether Ernst would send him an item out of his collection of photos of women in private moments. Otto was as convinced Ernst possessed such things as he was that Erich was somehow to blame for some marital problem or other of Otto's. He promised to send Otto something, then stopped by his office to make another note. Tomorrow, he'd requisition the latest model of camera they had and send Ernst home with it alongside instructions to find good lighting and a mirror. In the auspicious beginnings of the new year, Erich saw ever more reason for optimism. By force of habit he was awake to see Friday morning dawn sunny and clear before he burrowed further into the warmth of a soft, worn mattress and softer down. Like Christmas, he had three whole days of his own. Unlike Christmas, these ones he had to himself. The work week began with a clean break from the week, month, and year preceding it. By the end of the first day, his work life severed another tie with its past. New uniforms, cut and colored into a more modern style, were issued to them all to mark the beginning of a new era. Erich's came in a package delivered by Ernst at four in the afternoon. He didn't open it until the next morning. Much like the first one given to him twenty-one years ago, he laid it out on his bed, felt the fabric, traced his fingers along designs that hadn't been on a second lieutenant's collar. He wondered if that boy would be more shocked by what he'd accomplished in the two intervening decades, or by what he hadn't. Like Marian, he'd been glad to grow older, most times. Where he'd once had the arrogant sort of confidence that he'd be able to make things work the way he wanted them to, because that's how life had treated him so far, he now existed on a more reliable confidence that he'd find a way to go on living when they didn't. And still, he missed the old feeling some days. And still, he was glad he had another two years before he was forty to check off at least two delayed milestones. His household really was due for a renovation, in more than a figurative sense. A few hours after he put it on for the first time, Tanya was giving his uniform more critical scrutiny than he had in the mirror. For a time Erich assumed she was just staring through him while she thought, the way she was wont to if you didn't move for a certain amount of time and became part of the background scenery. Eventually, he realized it was intentional, the intense focus on him sending a momentary rush of cold adrenaline from head to toe. His eyes followed hers down to the expanse of faded gray-green below his neck. He wondered if she was jealous she didn't have one too, or only took issue with the color it would come in when she did get hers back, now that they'd changed it away from her favorite. "I liked the old color better," he offered, truthfully. The summer he'd spent in the Commonwealth attending garden parties in light-colored suits had convinced him they didn't do him any favors. Edith had pretended well enough that he looked good in them. Her older sister, and every mirror he'd passed, had told the truth. Drab, dull and forgettable was what neutral colors did for him. At his words, Tanya shook herself out of her reverie. "Me too," she said. She tilted her head a bit to the side, and he knew a question was coming before she asked it. "Did they redesign everything? Dress, field, desert, winter?" "Tanya," he said, and he knew his gaffe as soon as her name was halfway out of his mouth, which he wouldn't apologize for when she was behaving very much like a disobedient dog trying to sneak scraps off the table the moment you looked away. "How many times am I going to have to tell you we aren't planning on fighting beyond our borders again before you accept it's true?" "I…" she sighed. She folded in on herself, just a bit. "I want to accept it. But knowing it's possible, I can't help imagining it. That's all." A small thrill tickled its way through his veins at how she'd chosen to phrase her concession. He'd made appreciable progress, after all. He knew what it was like to not be able to keep his mind from circling around something against his will, knew it all too well because of her. All he needed was to get hers out of the loop it was stuck in, and his would be able to follow suit. "Okay," he replied, even, gentle almost, at least compared to the obvious annoyance in his last statement. "Fair enough. But no. Nothing for the desert, and nothing for a Sildberian winter." "That was exactly our problem last time, you realize. Nobody planned on doing it, we did it, we didn't have uniforms properly designed for the conditions until months into whatever we were doing. It might've made a real difference." He knew the validity of her point better than he'd like. He knew what illusions being issued Moskva-appropriate attire would put in passionate hearts better than he'd like, too. It was the bigger risk, for now, and by kilometers. "And we learned our lesson from it," he said. Elbows on his desk, he leaned forward over them slightly for emphasis. "Not to charge in underprepared." As usual, she refused to be defeated. She adopted a similar posture, made possible by the imposing size of his desk. He was eternally grateful to the entire square meter of Burgundy-stained cherrywood for how many places it gave him to put things. "It never hurts to be overprepared, either," Tanya countered. "It'd be humiliating to make the same mistake twice." "Let's compromise," he offered. He leaned back somewhat in conciliation, watched to see if she'd do the same, and almost chuckled aloud when she did. Fighting her at half-strength, strangely enough, was what had become most effective. He backed down; she backed down to meet him roughly at the same place. He couldn't do it all the way, because then she'd see the opening and roll right over him, which was almost as bad as coming at her with full strength and thereby giving her the idea to do the same. Her full strength being what it was, the end result didn't tend to be terribly different than giving up in the first place. He wished, not for the first time, he'd been more of a singular genius like her, capable of matching her at full force blow-for-blow. All he'd gotten was to be a bit smarter than average, enough so everyone had high expectations, and not nearly enough to guarantee total superiority in a field, not like her. He shook the thought from his head. Almost on their own, his eyes darted down to his right hand, where a wedding band might soon be, then across to hers. He was aiming to put his life back to normal, a state which would forever elude her. Even should she want to do something as unremarkable as get married one day, she'd have the hardest battle of her life ahead of her, finding someone who'd offer her a ring. Tanya was waiting patiently for him to continue, puzzled by his silence, and probably the head shake she hadn't known the cause of on top of it. "We'll get the other uniforms designed," he said. "Designed, samples reviewed, a future order put on hold with a contract we'll call on as soon as there's the slightest indication we'll need them. Good enough?" "Good enough," she agreed. A hint of a smile tugged on her lips. "I get the idea you think me rather uncompromising. I hope by now you know that isn't true." He nodded, only nodded, didn't tell her that everyone thought her more-than-rather uncompromising, he was simply the lone person that had gotten it through to her. He couldn't have her retreating into defensiveness now that she was finally sticking her neck out some. Tanya's sardonic humor faded, to be replaced by a seriousness so absolute it jarred even him, used to the mismatch between her appearance and demeanor as he was. She refocused on him with the same intensity as earlier, on his face this time. "I'm perfectly happy to compromise as long as I'm being offered something I value in return," she stated. Her arms didn't cross, though he sensed they'd like to. "I don't think that's unreasonable." "It's not," he shook his head, keeping silent on the rest once again. Part - maybe most - of the problem was that her starting position was so damned unreasonable, but there was little use belaboring that point. Surely, she thought the same of him. She smiled again, this time happily. "Good. Then I look forward to our future of mutually-beneficial compromises." He knew her well enough to suspect there was some further goal she was angling for with her strangely formal declaration of intent, like they were entering a legally-enforceable verbal contract. He expected he'd see the back of Tanya as she went off to want things from someone else more useful than him long before he stopped expecting there to be an ulterior motive for most of what she asked. "Did you have something else in mind?" By her quick series of nods, he could tell she was glad he asked. She bit her bottom lip, too, something he rarely saw unless she'd gotten too emotional to put her feelings on display. Most times that was anger, indicated by sucking both lips in between her teeth. "I really appreciated being able to spend a bit of the holiday with people I wouldn't normally get a chance to socialize with," she said. "Thank you again for that." It was all she needed to say for him to know precisely where the conversation was heading. Whatever damage showing her to the world was going to cause, he'd likely already caused it. He'd snuck a last visit in with Klaus before word got to him. Otto had already said his piece. Marian would say hers soon enough. Elya had called on Thursday to tell him he was falling for Tanya's wiles and she was done trying to save him from himself. At this point, there was little reason not to keep up the charade of promoting her as an officer while putting her on the market for other jobs. "I was hoping that wouldn't be a one-time event," Tanya continued, in the wake of his silence. She was looking down at the floor when she asked, then raised her eyes plaintively. "My impression is you get a light crowd at Christmas. And I know you'd already promised Wechter, but I'd like if I could go in my own right and not look like a tag-along out of pity." She was miscalculating on two parts, if that was what she wanted. Most importantly, Erich needed it to appear convincing to his betters that Tanya leaving the Army wasn't his goal to begin with. Second, while the rumors would end approximately one minute after meeting Tanya, until most people had met her in the context of a third-coworker-chaperoned event, showing up with just her would be a good way to generate a few rumors. She wasn't a child anymore, he had to occasionally remind himself, nor did she appear particularly bad on the outside. Neither was she the standard mid-ranking officer he tried to treat her as, someone that would look much more like Erich himself did. "That, well…maybe eventually," he frowned. Tanya straightened up at his objection. "There is something in it for you," she said. "Like I mentioned, it's a good compromise." He raised an eyebrow. Somewhat involuntarily, he gave two impatient taps of his pen against his desk. "My opinion carries a certain amount of weight on matters related to this job," she stated, now brimming with confidence, high in her chair with shoulders thrown back. "More than you'd expect from the average lieutenant colonel. It's mostly what people asked me about. I think there's something to be gained in me putting in my own good word for you back." The utter, utter arrogance of that statement should shock him so much he'd be forgiven for throwing a punch over it, were the person saying it not an eighteen-year-old girl but his equal in all things the way they both tended to pretend she was. She was right, in a certain way, that people were interested in hearing her opinion. Even much of the Army thought her half-legend, the feats and vices of several mages conflated into one mythological chimera. You didn't get to hear opinions from fantastical creatures every day. Whether anyone would find her ratings of him valuable in forming their own views was a separate story. She had too little in common with anyone she'd meet to make them think there was much reason they should like who she liked or hate who she hated. Erich smiled at the absurdity of it all. He'd rather have her saying good things than bad things, he supposed. He would have to listen in a few times to ensure her idea of what he'd count as good things wasn't entirely skewed. "Alright," he chuckled. She launched an attack of her not-so-bad side in his direction in response, moving slightly in her seat like she was doing a secret victory dance she knew wasn't part of the professional image she worked so hard to maintain. "But let me give Wechter a fair chance to meet people a few more times, too." He checked his watch while she nodded. More than half an hour in and they hadn't even begun to talk about the pile of work in front of them. For Tanya, that was downright impressive. One more compromise for the books. A month after they'd asked for samples, Erich was standing in an empty office that had been converted into a clothing boutique catering to an oddly-specific sort of client. One who liked pockets and utility belts and hated strong colors and the concept of starch. Here a row for jackets, there for pants, another for coats, an endless supply stretching wall-to-wall, shoes and suspenders and sacks lining the outside, their country had more patriotic clothing manufacturers than he could count. The size of the possible supplier contract had nothing to do with it, he was sure. The details of the differences in uniform styles were lost on him. He'd never seen a desert, nor a Sildberian winter; neither had he spent much time in the air. At the last minute, Tanya had added a demand for redesigned mage gear that had fewer loose flaps and more similar colors to the sky. She'd warned him that the next time she flew, she'd refuse to do it as a floating cucumber easily visible to artillery. That had nearly kept him from forwarding her request on, so that maybe she'd stay permanently settled down there in the office with him. Erich's eyes swept once more over rows of whites and grays and blues and beiges, then he was off to relay the news of the uniforms' arrival to Tanya. Because he'd been the one to ask, procurement wanted an opinion out of him he didn't have. He was sure she would. He heard Tanya before he saw her, a curse and then the thunk of her boot against wood. Her fits of rage no longer presaged imminent threat to him the way they once had. He'd seen enough come and go without anything more resulting, no attempts to stab subordinates or shake superiors. A leftover instinct of hesitation was all that whispered to him to stop, and made it so that he opened the door in slow centimeters to give him more time to back out. When he asked, Erich learned she was angry because the newest addition to the Weiss family was already destined to be a failure of a subordinate to the next generation of Degurechaffs. The little boy had poor time-management skills and hadn't arrived on the scheduled date for his meeting with the world. That, in turn, had thrown off Tanya's plans to move. She asked him if there were any other mages in the Staff Office that he knew of. Captain Backhaus was busy, too. Tanya had already checked. "Regular people aren't entirely useless," Erich said, mock-insulted but in truth amused by her ignorance, and slightly curious how she thought the rest of them got by. "I helped Sauer when he moved. He lives over by you." Tanya didn't get the message that he was volunteering Ernst for a healthful weekend of celibacy, and instead ended up volunteered for one himself, finding more hope in his past as a moving assistant than in Ernst's present as her neighbor. Out of the thousand excuses Erich could give her to get out of helping, he didn't have much desire to name one. Probably because she'd said she might kill her neighbors soon. It was his duty to make sure it was a joke. It was his responsibility. Their walk down to the first floor where the samples were located was silent, punctuated by the sound of Tanya breathing, sharp and anxious going in, heavy and sighing going out, thumbnail stuck between her teeth once she stood still. "These came in awfully fast," she said. "For things we aren't planning on using." She stared at him from the side of her eyes, a bit hostile, a bit hurt, accusation radiating through the tension he saw strung through shoulders and fists. This time, he was blameless. He hadn't lied to her, outright or by omission. The omission he'd make in a moment. Two days ago, he'd gotten word that Zettour had decided they'd played out their losing bluff with the Polaskans long enough. Among the privileges the Empire was asking back, aerial mages were on the list. Those uniforms, at the least, might need to be sewn up with haste. "I'm not at liberty to say anything officially," he told her. "And I only learned earlier this week myself. But I'd expect to hear an update out of Londinium in the next month or so." "The treaty?" she asked, smart enough to catch on. He merely nodded, dull ache in his chest blooming while he watched the opposite reaction in her, how the air of victory swelled her lungs and fed the fire in her eyes, altogether too excited for him to pretend she was happy for the same reasons he was, though he tried. His year was going well, so far, and he wouldn't give up on it until the last. "That's great news," Tanya smiled, wide and open and so unnaively honest. "It's the best thing that could happen. It might mark a real turning point in our history." It was more praise than a couple small concessions deserved. Erich had no doubt she saw more in it than a return to normalcy. It took away the guilt of keeping the mage-related specifics from her. He didn't want to know what paroxysms that would bring, just yet. This one alone had her humming softly while she sorted through the samples, the sound echoing slightly in the stale air of the unused room. Something by Burgmuller, he thought. She must have been keeping up with her self-taught music lessons. He watched her fingers, slim and yet still somehow stubby, but strong, he knew, he'd felt their grip, as they rearranged hangers. A pluck from a rack here, a tug at a sleeve there, a sort of flourish when they stretched out to feel the fabric. For a woman who wore almost nothing besides white shirts, black pants, and a necklace of simple silver he only noticed every so often when the sun hit it right, Tanya had an eye for colors and styles in the way they mattered to her. In that moment, Erich wished the world were not as it was. He'd survived a friendly meal with her, he expected to survive seeing the inside of her home, he thought he'd survive it, too, if she saw his so she could come share a meal and then sit down at the bench in his parlor and he could hear the sound of Burgmuller echoing through his walls while he fell asleep again, just the once. When she finished, Erich sent her assessment to the officers in procurement. The next morning, he was doing another assessment of style, this time hers. Waiting for Tanya to come to the door, he used the architectural details of her residence as a distraction from the cold. Gentle morning light filtering through the mist softened the apartment building's harsh lines and hard angles of modernity only to the slightest degree. The facade was a dull gray, sturdy and unfriendly in its lack of whimsy. It reminded him somewhat of a fort. The impression remained after Tanya, less fashionable than usual in a blue warm-up suit, led him up stairs of bare concrete and metal. Her apartment was as barren as the rest of her building, too-clean-white plaster walls reflecting cold light onto a sparse collection of furniture and a small stack of crates lined up in a corner. From the bags under her eyes and the smell of strong, freshly-brewed coffee adding the only hint of life to the place, Erich guessed she'd been up most of the night packing. She offered him a cup, which he took despite her apologies she hadn't thought ahead to pick up cream for him. "Did you buy this from the last tenant?" he asked, knocking lightly on the well-worn wood of her table. "Everything but my mattress," she confirmed. "I used to care more about buying things new, but, well, the war was good for learning to appreciate anything sturdy and serviceable." "Did you have many new things at the orphanage?" Her adoptive home hadn't been destitute, exactly. All the same, he hadn't noticed much that had looked manufactured within the last decade the time he'd stopped by. "No," she replied sharply, and he wondered if referencing her ignominious origins had offended her slightly. "So that's why I appreciate them so much." The table went first, from Apartment 601 to 402, then its chairs, and once those were out of the way to make room for the big things, mattress, frame, and dresser. Tanya's reading chairs went next, and the boxes of small goods last. There was no talking, barely at all. Terse instructions from Tanya were all he got. Her concentration was spent on the strengthening spell she used, which kept her eyes half-closed and lips mumbling to themselves, leaving him to guide. He didn't know what was going on in her mind, but he could feel it, almost. As her focus waxed and waned, more weight shifted to him, and then less, a constant response-rebalance-reset as he adapted himself to her. Three bruised fingers later - two of his and one of hers - they were done, still in time for a late lunch. "I'd offer to make something, but it's all packed up," Tanya said. Her arm swept out at the crates crowding her kitchen counters. "Plus, I'm not clear on if you'd count that as a reward or a punishment." "I'm sure I can find something around," he shrugged. "Actually…" She tapped her chin twice. "There's a place I've been wanting to try. It's popular, so I think they must not want me occupying a table to myself. Maybe we can get a seat with the two of us. Let me change." The door to Tanya's bedroom closed, fully enough the latch clicked audibly, yet he heard no lock turn afterwards. There was something strange about it to him, the implicit trust she had that he'd respect the boundary. Most women didn't. Most women also hadn't spent years where a tent flap and good behavior was all that stood between them and thousands of men, he supposed. The door to Tanya's bedroom opened to her looking closer to the average woman than she did most days. She was in a skirt. "It was the box on top," she shrugged, picking self-consciously at the medium-brown wool after catching his surprise. Once they reached the location in question, it took Erich approximately five seconds, and more than five appreciative smiles from the other gentlemen in the bar, to figure out why Tanya was met with unwelcome stares. In good humor, maybe from the ego boost, maybe just at Tanya's continued confusion, he walked them down the block to somewhere more tolerant of pairs like them. They were seated in a booth by someone more tired than either of them, bench seats and table of simple wood covered with four paper doilies, one for each place setting. There was no menu, only a spare list off the top of the waiter's head. It was perfect. No pretensions, and no pretending. Over ravenous bites of hearty vegetable stew for her and the house specialty Eisbein for him, brightly flavored pickled pork charred and contrasted with the mushy peas under it - which Tanya politely declined a cut of - they exchanged a bit about first her neighborhood, then his. The worst of their hunger over and forkfuls becoming paced out to allow true conversation, Tanya reached into her purse and pulled out a stack of papers. From the title, Erich could see it was her back-burner project for the past nine months, a full review of the costs and benefits of new border fortifications. He hoped it was the full review, at least. It rivaled an encyclopedia volume in size. "I figured if I gave it to you here, there's no official record it's complete yet," Tanya mentioned, glancing around the cozy confines of the family restaurant for familiar faces. "In case you don't want it to be. But you did say something about it at Christmas." Erich's thumb brushed along the bottom right corner and flipped through the heavy weight of paper while he leaned down to look at it at eye-level to better judge the height. "I don't know whether to be more terrified or impressed this is the result of not working hard," he muttered. "No, I - I didn't. Just in my free time." His head lifted, and a single eyebrow followed in its wake. "Is this your way of arguing back with me that you really didn't need time to yourself like I tried to make you take?" She startled at the accusation, unrancorous as it was. A hand went to cover her mouth so she could chew impolitely fast. After an audible gulp, her hand dropped and she opened her mouth. "It wasn't meant to be," she said, concern tinging the edges of her tone and lending a higher, faster pitch than the flat rebuttals she typically gave. "I was joking," he chuckled, waving the issue away. "Sort of." She relaxed into her chair. As did he, which was a mistake. Soothed by the warmth of the nearby hearth, stomach satiated by the rich fat of his ham hock, the lullaby of a hundred background sounds playing, the scrape-slurp-clink of Tanya eating, an old recording of Du, du liegst mir im Herzen, murmured conversation from other tables, the snap and crackle of logs burning, Erich's perusal of the section titles and subheadings alone weighed heavy on his eyelids and sent his thoughts astray. It took him longer than it should have to page through. Long enough Tanya was trying to lick a finger clean of the vanilla sauce from the bread pudding he hadn't noticed she'd ordered, in a way that didn't violate the fastidious manners she kept at the table. Tanya put her hand into her napkin as soon as she realized him watching. He looked away in the same moment, sorry to have caught her at such an awkward juncture. When he checked back a second later, she was patting the same napkin at her lips with purposeful daintiness. He smiled a bit, just to himself. Who did she think she was fooling, really? 
 xXx 
Tanya replaced the napkin onto her lap with a cough. For obvious reasons, she did her best to eat like a proper adult when in company. Seeing how engrossed her partner had been in her writing, she'd thought she could sneak in a final taste of her dessert's leftovers from where it had ended up on her hand. As usual, fate was conspiring against her. Thankfully, she wasn't reprimanded for her impolite display. Being a pitiful orphan had its advantages, on occasion. "You went on quite the interesting tangent here," Lehrgen said. He tapped his finger at the section heading for matters pertaining to cross-border commerce with the Republic. "How surprisingly unpatriotic of you." Tanya bristled at the hint of sarcasm in his tone. There was no mistaking it for anything but a warning she was getting close to the line he'd tolerate for a good Imperial citizen. Now that she had let slip she wasn't solely dedicated to a career of violence, her excuses for why she'd spent so much time talking about economic integration with supposed enemies would look flimsy. Tanya had foreseen that defect, and at the last minute, she'd added as many hostile-sounding financial terms to that section as she could dream up. "You can hate something and still find it useful," she countered. "I'd argue it's more patriotic to seek out advantages for your country where you can. The Republic isn't our enemy. For now." From a national security perspective, Tanya had no trouble understanding the allure of self-sufficiency. Appearing to relinquish that was therefore unattractive. Personally, she saw greater risk in further isolating her country from Western Europa than anything else. "We have an active communist party," she said, looking around for any likely suspects to point out for proof but failing to find any. Like a good blue-blooded Germanian, Lehrgen had somehow managed to find the one traditional place close by on his first try. Tanya had needed to make the best of the so-called menu. "A very active communist party, she continued. "As does the Republic. Once everyone has more money in their pockets, we'll have an easier time sidelining them. We can always deal with the Republic after the communists. We can't do anything the other way around. Unless you're willing to fight for the Red Army. I know how they treat their mages, and I expect you know how they treat anyone too educated or too titled." "I was joking," Lehrgen said, for the second time since they'd sat down, this round with a sigh. Nonetheless, he smiled faintly. "Sort of." Tanya did her best to smile in return, lest her boss think she couldn't take a bit of friendly ribbing. She suspected there was a grain of truth in both of his sort-of jokes, and she'd failed to meet expectations on multiple counts. She ordered them both a post-prandial coffee in a bid to extend their time together, making sure to request cream for her companion. While she'd indicated to him earlier she knew his preference for the additive, he seemed confused when she successfully ordered the correct thing for him. Between the physical exertion that morning and the quiet reading period they'd just finished, she and Lehrgen hadn't gotten much of a chance to actually talk to each other. Despite the fact that Tanya knew she had hours of unpacking awaiting her and she could hardly spare another minute hanging around unproductively, her subconscious desire was to stay. In the end, she was a person who prioritized her long-term career health over her short-term sleep needs. First as a salaryman, and then as a soldier, it had been the norm. As such, it had become second nature for her to stay until she was sure the criticisms she'd received weren't anything to worry about. Plus. Chatting over coffee was much more enjoyable than unpacking. Had she not already grossly imposed on Lehrgen's schedule, she'd ask him to come back and help. Even if he did nothing but sit there with her, his presence would keep her from making excuses about doing it later and taking a nap instead. The coffee came shortly, but not the chatting. Lehrgen had asked for her pen and was now deeply engrossed in marking the document up. Tanya contented herself sipping away at her drink for the time being. It had the bitterness of grounds that had sat in hot water for too long. She'd had worse. Feeling how much she needed the coffee, she briefly reconsidered asking Lehrgen to come over and enforce productivity on her unpacking ventures. Once again, she had to shake herself out of instant-gratification fantasyland. Over the coming year, she had to be careful not to overabuse the privileges he was extending to her. At this point, Tanya couldn't afford any missteps. Under the guise of increasing her visibility as a strategy-oriented rear-line officer, Lehrgen was helpfully providing her a foot in the door for all kinds of suitable career paths. The people she was meeting were more the owner than manager types. That gave them substantial flexibility to hire whomever they liked without much regard for the desired experience listed in the job description. As long as they did, indeed, like her. Exciting as the opportunity was to mercilessly exploit, it had to be handled with utmost care. On one side, she was bounded by the dangers of excessive honesty. There was no way Lehrgen would use his influence on her behalf if he didn't expect a return on the investment. He had other officers' careers to advance. On the other side, Tanya was in for trouble if she wasn't honest enough. Given her rather unique record and status, it was all anyone had wanted to talk to her about. If she didn't give some hints she had other goals, she'd remain stuck in limbo. Looking across the table, Tanya was helpless against a smile at the man distractedly making notes on her draft, coffee cup in his left hand, pen in his right, occasionally lifting one or the other to his mouth to drink or stick between his teeth to turn the page. She couldn't have asked for superior company at a social event. He was comfortable enough with the group to guide her around, and not so comfortable he didn't want a break from keeping the mask up. It had felt all the more natural to let her own guard down than force him to re-engage with her at the usual polite distance. Wallowing in her exhaustion had given her the wherewithal she'd needed to go repeat the same answers to the same questions about her past all over again, when what she really wanted was to discuss her future. Tanya took a satisfied sip of her drink, barely registering the bitter taste. Time was all she needed, and time was on her side. A year and a half would be sufficient to slowly change people's minds about her without triggering alarm bells and causing Lehrgen to cut off all contact with her. That outcome would be enormously counterproductive. The whole point of having another career only made sense so long as it was less dangerous than remaining in service. Tanya needed to keep every friend on the inside she could until she was either safely out of the country, safely too old for active duty, or best of all, safely rich enough to avoid incurring real consequences for her actions. She leaned forward a bit, curious what Lehrgen was thinking about. She was proud of the effort she'd put into her thesis, but she was by no means an economist. Her boss had stayed true to his word on taking a soft touch with minor quality-of-work mistakes. Oddly, Tanya had gotten to where she wasn't terribly bothered by the implication he was a witness to a few imperfections. After much reflection, she'd come to the conclusion there was substantial efficiency in the support framework he'd devised for managing his subordinates. They submitted a good first effort that made sense to them, he pointed out the gaps that were apparent as a third party, and they worked on fixing only those, as opposed to spending their time papering over every conceivable scenario, including ones that didn't need it. Frankly, Tanya was disappointed in herself. She was stuck in single-dimension signaling. Someone else had figured out how to do synchronized team signaling where you projected weaknesses off each other for better results than could be achieved individually. Truly, geniuses walked among them. In retrospect, she could see why he'd been so adamant about forcing her participation. And here she'd thought Lehrgen was just being nice. Of course, the success of this approach was reliant on two important factors: first, Lehrgen being intelligent enough to provide worthwhile advice, and second, being trustworthy enough not to hold the flaws you exposed against you when it became convenient for him. That didn't make it replicable enough in practice to widely replace Tanya's individual-level signaling model. Or maybe she only believed that to feel better about her blatant process failure. Regardless, for its present application, she had to admit Lehrgen's method was superior. Overall, it made her more inclined to watch him writing for the purposes of learning penmanship by osmosis rather than use it to prepare arguments about why she'd overlooked whatever he was jotting down. The section he was on was her personal favorite. She wasn't particularly a fan of top-down government actions like a Eurozone concept, though she'd take that over war any day. A ground-up movement for doing things like establishing common standards through international industry self-regulatory bodies, or the like, could achieve many of the same goals without formal legislation. Besides, getting electoral support for a common Europan community was currently so far in pipe dream territory they'd need to invent new drugs just to hallucinate it was possible. Tanya didn't put much faith in the emotional whims of voters. Her faith was in money. Money had a beautiful tendency to go where it could be used best, without respect for pesky things like borders. The greatest good she could do would be to remove artificial barriers preventing nature from taking its course. Any patriotic irrationalities of the Empire's constituent population had become subservient to the desires of its best-capitalized citizens once the country converted to a democratic system. The men who mattered should desire the continued income stream that peaceable intentions brought. Who ever said money in politics was a bad thing? It was rare that Tanya found herself wanting to talk about something other than such a treasured topic in favor of casual conversation. Truth be told, it may have been so long ago she was eighteen, the first time around. Nonetheless, she wanted to switch the focus off her so-called unpatriotic tangent, at least for now. The first subject that came to mind was fishing for some more details on what restrictions the Empire could expect lifted from the military. Patriotism 101. Tanya waved Lehrgen's attention away from her writing so she could get it directly on her. In reality, the changes themselves weren't of much importance to her. What mattered was the optics. All parties showing a willingness to negotiate in good faith set a potentially history-altering precedent. Any reduction in total resentment was a win, in her books. When Tanya went to take her next sip, her eyes drifted down to the first casual outfit she'd ever seen Lehrgen sport, a simple sweater over a button-down. Her wins were forever battling against her losses. The uniform he'd foregone for the day hadn't received an update she was keen on. Without being an expert on each and every iteration of clothing worn in the interwar period, it was hard to say anything with certainty. Tanya had spent a few minutes that first day trying to match the new fashion to her memories of how the fascists had dressed themselves. Largely, she'd come up with nothing. Except that they'd gotten closer. She sighed into her coffee. To some degree, that was to be expected. Logic worked the same way between worlds; thus, logical alterations to soldierly garb remained similar. Hearing Lehrgen mention Elya's name, Tanya recalled a warning she'd been told to pass along. "Elya told me to tell you she's giving up on you, by the way." Understandably, Lehrgen was caught off guard by that, and not in a good way. Elya was nothing if not a catch, as long as you could put up with the motor-mouth. Tanya raised her hands in innocence. "I won't pry what that's about," she assured him. Tanya couldn't wholly claim to be above wanting to pry, in this case. To her knowledge, Elya had a serious boyfriend, who was wealthy on top of being good-looking. Therefore, she had no reason to pine over a man she'd had a brief, work-induced fling with in Ildoa so badly it had taken her five years to get over him. As far as Tanya was aware, she'd never captured a woman's heart so thoroughly. Needless to say, it made her wonder what he was doing right that she hadn't, though part of her suspected she might be happier not knowing. She had to be allowed to have some pride. Sensing a threat to an ego that no longer existed and should be permitted to rest in peace, Tanya cleared her throat and pointedly refocused elsewhere. Luckily, Lehrgen conspired with her on that count. He put his finger on the salt shaker to his right and began rocking it back and forth. An exasperated now what rose up in Tanya's gut. Like a good employee, she'd become attuned to her boss's tics over time. It was no secret to her that he had a habit of fiddling with whatever object was within reach when he got nervous. There was nothing obvious to pin the reaction on, either in the environment around them or their verbal exchange. It was looking like she must be in for a real "treat". "Look, um…I wanted to run something by you." Tanya hid her frown behind her cup and nodded. "What if I told you I might've found a way to make up the schooling anyone missed out on when they got called for service?" She merely nodded again, feeling the muscles around her eyes bunch up in a bit of a squint. So far, her experience of this life told her she was best off submitting any gift horses she received to a full-service dental exam. She knew better than to say anything before she heard the catch. Either she wasn't included in the population of eligible students because she hadn't been conscripted, in which case Lehrgen was nervous she was going to explode in frustration that her dream was just past her fingertips, or there was a condition she wasn't going to like. Otherwise, he wouldn't be sharing good news like he wasn't sure it was good. "It'll be another year or so until the paperwork's figured out, probably," he continued. His eyes dropped to the table and he made a noticeable grimace. "We have to make it so that no one suspects it's a new form of officer training, or the like." And there it was. Another way of recruiting her services back to the Army for a guaranteed fifteen years. "Nice of you to sweeten the pot," Tanya conceded. "But I don't see what difference it really makes if the end result is that the program funnels you back into the Army. Maybe for people missing the education and not just the credentials. But for me…" She drifted off with a sigh. The most compelling argument Lehrgen had made recently was to clarify the government had reserved the right to conscript her on a moment's notice. It was annoying, but didn't ultimately change much, at least in the current climate. "That's actually not a requirement," Lehrgen said. "To rejoin." Tanya's eyes narrowed further at the admission. There was something that wasn't adding up. "Then why are you telling me about this?" she asked. "I figured you'd hear about it eventually anyway." "Probably true," she agreed. "But why are you telling me?" She put some stress on the pronouns to make her point clear. This was like a manager recommending their star employee take advantage of a corporate-sponsored certification program that had no relevance for their job but could easily lead them into a career change. It simply didn't happen. If you hated working with someone that much and had failed to get them fired, maybe. Otherwise you were gifting away talent to someone else. "Is it that strange?" Lehrgen sighed. "Educational credentials only matter for your career," she shrugged. "As far as the career world goes, you're my boss. I believe it was you that said my schooling would have no effect on my career in the Army. You'll excuse me for being a bit confused, I hope." "You aren't my employee. There's more to it than that," he replied, in the emphatic tone she associated more with his this isn't an argument, these are orders mood than the contemplative, willing-to-debate mood. Tanya prided herself on rarely encountering the former. From her observations, Lehrgen wasn't above giving people a reminder that the military wasn't a democracy if he didn't find their intellectual acumen worth his time. She supposed she had no stones to throw in that department. In fact, she applauded the efficiency of such an approach. In the next moment, Lehrgen sat back in his seat and took away the hand he'd chopped down on the table to drive his point audibly home. His posture returned to an open one. "Well, you are my employee," he admitted, with a laugh. "But among other things. If I could look you up in the dictionary I don't think it would read 'Tanya: Erich's employee,' and when you went to me, my definition would be 'Erich: Tanya's boss.' I'd like to think there's a little more to us than that." Erich, as he apparently wanted to call himself, laughed again, this time mixed with a sigh. He knew as well as she did the argument they were people outside their job descriptions didn't address her winning logic of pointing out that this whole thing was about what made sense for their careers. His and hers. Tanya began to think there might not be a catch. The signs of being nervous she'd seen might have been symptoms of feeling conflicted. As an officer, General von Lehrgen shouldn't help her escape the Army. As Erich, he felt differently. "That's true," she acknowledged, retaining her stubborn stance. "Still…" She left the argument hanging. There was nothing to be gained by showing her hand too early and jumping at the chance to run away before anything was put on paper. At worst, she could be left with nothing but a reputation for indecent levels of selfishness. Tanya would sign up if and when something to sign up for legitimately materialized. "I suppose it isn't something you'd do in my position," her boss sighed. Tanya frowned. The exasperation reminded her of a conversation she'd had with Visha touching on her interpersonal level of morality, or lack thereof. "Do you think that makes me a bad person?" she asked. Erich sighed again, heavier this time. "It doesn't make you a good one," he laughed, with no mirth. "Not that I have much to stand on in this argument." Tanya took a sip of her drink and nodded. She didn't imagine any of her previous bosses considered her a particularly good person. She'd never cared to ask. So long as they didn't consider her particularly bad, either, "niceness" wasn't what got you promoted. Clearly, there was a mutual understanding of that at their table. "Like I said," Tanya chuckled. "You can see why it would confuse me what the catch is if you're offering this up." All of a sudden, the scene went from two colleagues calmly sipping their coffees and sharing managerial woes to a temper tantrum. A very one-sided temper tantrum. Tanya was still calmly sipping away at her coffee until she realized the gravity of the situation. Enough bills were withdrawn from a ripped-open wallet to more than cover the expense of the meal and slammed down onto the table hard enough to make the silverware clink on her plate. "I can understand perfectly well why you'd be suspicious I could make myself useful in being actually helpful to you, for once," he said, nostrils flared and jaw tight. "And I am sorry about that. But I can't go back and fix the past, alright?" "Erich, hey, wait," she stalled, reaching her hand down to prevent his from going anywhere, not sure what she was going to say but sure he was about to leave on a very sour note and ruin everything she wanted for her future. "I didn't mean it that way. Don't…" He stopped trying to get up, so Tanya took a deep breath and forced her panicking mind into an objective assessment of her position. She'd known the look on his face instinctively before she'd been able to consciously put a name to why it made the pit fall out of her stomach. She'd seen it from across her desk too many times to count. Anger with eyes narrowed at her meant the person being reprimanded thought she was wrong about their poor performance, and hated her for it. Anger with eyes wide and staring beyond her was the opposite. The person recognized she was right, and hated themselves for it. For obvious reasons, that reaction used to delight her. It meant they'd taken the first step to a successful improvement plan: recognizing there was a problem. For equally obvious reasons, she wasn't in a place to be happy about associating herself with feelings of self-loathing. Tanya drew her extended hand back and clasped both together in front of her. Until she was mentally prepared to feel the impending doom of seeing the injured facial expressions again, she kept herself studiously inspecting her fingers. She judged that accidentally reciprocating the first-name basis her boss had slipped into was helping her case for appearing sensitive. After hearing it so many times out of Elya's mouth, it wasn't the first time she'd gotten close to saying it, merely the first time she'd gone over the line. Regardless, she owed an apology for it. "Sorry," she said, clearing her throat, still looking at her hands. "I was mostly justifying the tendency not to be over-generous. Not trying to bring up the past." Tanya had the irrational urge to reach her hand out again. This time, to grab the man by the collar, pull him close, and headbutt him with sufficient force to transfer the migraine threatening her over to him. The war had left her with a few impulsive tendencies she didn't used to have, she had to admit. This infuriatingly confusing human being had voluntarily named himself her champion as a child soldier, hadn't been able to do much because of the necessities of war, walked around still feeling touchy about it, independently decided to make their conversation about it, then got upset by it, which Tanya might have to pay the consequences for. Hardly a fair deal. It was hard to be angry at him for it in a strict sense of the emotion. The tendency was precisely what made him so dependable of an ally. All the same, it was a danger inherent to mixing business with personal that she avoided when she could. Giving people reasons to individually like you could easily result in giving them reasons to individually hate you. Getting someone you liked promoted didn't serve anyone's personal interest for more than half a second. Getting someone you disliked fired had lasting positive effects on your overall work satisfaction. It was therefore self-evident it was safer not to participate in work as yourself. "So," Lehrgen said after a moment. To Tanya's relief, he was smiling slightly when she had the courage to look up. "Are you still going to tell me you're confused why people do nice things for other people on a whim or…?" She rolled her eyes, confident their usual rapport had been re-established. "There's several good reasons I could name for why I wouldn't have wanted you to leave angry. It wasn't a whim." She got an eyeroll in return that said he didn't believe her. Of course, as a human being, she was capable of feeling guilty, including for things that weren't her fault. It was no grounds for putting aside rational behavior. But, she wasn't immune to the effect of watching someone blame themselves more for failing her than she did, it was true. "Fine," she conceded. She leaned back and crossed her arms. "I also just felt a bit bad and wanted to assist. You can go ahead and say I told you so, if that's what you wanted." He shook his head a few times, eyes crinkled at the corners and lips pressed together. To keep from smiling too smugly, she presumed. "I do hope you aren't bringing up my education only because you feel guilty," she added. "Of course not," he laughed. He leaned back as well, crossing his hands behind his head and sliding forward into his seat so far it knocked their knees together. "It's because you deserve to have a certificate stating you're at least as smart as your best friend Ernst." Tanya was sure it was intentional when he kneed her underneath the table this time, which shot a spark of frustrated indignity up her spine. She scowled at the sarcasm. Between the two of them, it was Sauer who deserved to be poked fun at for his behavior. "I don't understand why you can't like him the way all the rest of us do," Lehrgen said, levering himself to sit up straighter and giving a yawn. "I thought you might ask him for moving services and not me. Seeing that as he's in the neighborhood." "I don't dislike him as a person," she clarified. "I frequently question whether we want him as a representative of our brand." Lehrgen laughed, then drained the last of his coffee. "As a rule, women aren't so impressed with war stories as men are. I think Ernst is helping our cause with the general population." Tanya was doubtful of that herself. She was also doubtful that Ernst was capable of being alone in a room with a bed and a woman without getting confused about what services he was being called upon to provide. At this point, he'd probably established a Pavlovian response. "Be that as it may…" Tanya said. She leaned her head to the side and looked askance at Lehrgen so that he knew that she knew he was being purposely obtuse. "He's not who I want in my bedroom." "Fair enough," Lehrgen laughed. "Fair enough. Let me know if he ever pesters you, though I get the idea he likes being the one getting chased. You're safer than you think with him." "I didn't say I felt unsafe," Tanya objected. She had no intention of ruining anyone's reputation with false accusations. "That's not…" She sighed and gave up. They weren't going to see eye to eye where Sauer was concerned. Maybe in Erich's next life as Erika, he'd grasp the concept of psychological safety from unwanted objectification she was more concerned over. "Anyway, thanks for helping," she said, smiling brightly. She'd planned on paying for lunch. But the bills were already on the table. She didn't think she was doing the von Lehrgen bank accounts great harm by not insisting he redeposit them. "I guess I'll see you Monday." 
 xXx 
The rhythmic knock of his headboard against the wall was the final remnant of Ernst Sauer's dream. It had been a nice dream. He was trying to piece it back together from the part stuck in his head. Knock, knock, knock. He could hear it. He was almost there. Back into it. He could hear his dream, just not see it anymore. Knock, knock, knock. He tried to remember who it was. Klara? Klara. Klara, and her long, dark, itchy hair. No. Itchy was him mixing in reality. It was Klara's itchy hair on his chest, and he was so hot. So fucking hot on the right side where she and all the covers were. Frigid on his left half. Absolutely frigid. He was awake. He had to be. Knock, knock, knock. It took all his effort to turn his head towards the clock. The hour hand stood halfway between seven and eight. Nobody bothered him before ten. Maybe he was still asleep. Anyone that knew him knew not to come by this early on a Saturday. Knock, knock, knock. He'd lied. All of his effort was actually what it took to inch his legs to the edge of the bed and try to sit up against gravity pulling his and Klara's weight back down. "Oh," she yawned. "If you're awake, then…" His hand wasn't responsive enough to bat hers away, but the primal, knee jerk reaction to sudden movements towards the groin area wasn't affected by his lethargy. Knock, knock, knock. "C'mon," Klara smiled, jerking her head to acknowledge the sound in the hall. "Who cares?" Coming on was interrupted by the sound of his doorknob jangling. There were three options for who would come to his place at such an hour, and he could easily eliminate two. His landlord, and his boss, who'd fucking insisted, and Ernst knew why, he really did, Erich had to be able to get him out of bed at any time he pleased - those two had a key. They could be in bed with him at this point. That left Emil. "It's gotta be my brother," he said, pulling some pants on. "Feel free to come as you are. Our parents took our doors off when we were thirteen and it didn't achieve the desired result. My family's all seen a lot of each other on bad behavior." "Mm," Klara hummed, poking at his back while they made their way to the door. "He look much like you?" Ernst sighed. He knew what her next question was going to be after he answered. It was what girls always asked. "I'd say so. We're identical twins." Klara made a gasp of hurtfully pure delight. "Twins? There's two of you?" She paused, probably to be briefly embarrassed about what she was about to ask. He'd seen it a hundred times. Maybe literally a hundred times. Without fail, the curiosity won in the end. "Any chance you…and him…we….?" "We're triplets, actually. We have a sister too. And we're close, but not that close. No. Anyway, both of them are married, so double no." Klara made a low whistle. "Lucky lady." "I hate them together," Ernst mumbled. "They're both hopeless romantics. They're constantly blowing kisses at each other and putting food in the other's mouth and stuff. He shouldn't be allowed to make our face look so dumb and gross. He probably wants me to take their kid so they can go on a date or something." "Ernst!" He paused, hand on the doorknob. Klara's front pressed firmly up against his back; her arms clasped around him. "You can't let me meet some kid looking like this! And what if it's a police officer or something?" "I didn't tell you that you couldn't get dressed," he laughed. "Just you didn't have to. I don't think that's my fault. If it's a police officer, you'll put him in a good mood. And babies see tits all the time, if you think about it." His impeccable logic didn't convince her. She remained hidden, just her head poking out around his right side. He jerked the door inwards. "Hey-," His greeting cut off when his entire body froze in fear and he lost temporary control of his vocal chords. Not her. He'd rather a police officer. This was bad. He stepped back a bit, right onto Klara's foot, which made it worse because she detached to hop around and show off as much skin as possible in the process. There was bad. There was very bad. Then there was being nearly naked on a Saturday morning in front of your boss's future wife while another nearly naked person danced around in front of her bad. And then there was the looking as good as he did nearly naked while the future wife tried her hardest not to stare but he could still tell she wanted to kind of bad. "Hi. Elise. What's up?" That sounded stupid and definitely wasn't helping salvage the situation. He didn't mind too much, because there wasn't a lot he figured he could do that would salvage the situation. For a moment, they just stood there staring at each other. Ernst liked to think she was at least as confused about why he'd decided to answer the door shirtless, bedheaded, with an equally shirtless and bedheaded girl at his side, as he was confused why he'd answered the door to Erich's girlfriend, picnic basket in hand and dressed for work. "Your sister-in-law looks…different than I imagined," Klara tried to whisper. "Well…" he began, exactly in time with Elise finding her voice to say, "I'm…" They paused. Shared a nod. Now that the shock was wearing off, he was beginning to think there was a way out. He was in a lot of trouble, but somehow, it felt like Erich must be also. That meant he could save himself if he figured out how to save Erich. "Aren't you supposed to be moving today?" Elise asked after a moment of silence for everyone's dignity. She tried to peer into the dark mess of a room behind him. "Erich said he was helping. So I made lunch for later, and…umm…" In front of him, Elise lifted the wicker basket she was holding up half a meter, then let her arm drop back to her side. Behind him, Klara repeated Erich's name, half-whispered, half-screamed. He heard her hands clap against her skin. It didn't take a genius to guess what body parts she was covering. While the two women stewed in awkwardness, Ernst saw a light at the end of the tunnel. He already looked like a piggish idiot to some degree. If he leaned into it, he'd look like so much of a piggish idiot he could sell Elise the lie that he was, indeed, moving that very day. It was such a bad plan it just might work. "Yeah," he laughed, looking over his shoulder at the various pieces of evidence he wasn't going anywhere for a long time. "He's gonna be pretty pissed about how disorganized I am, I think. It was worth it, though." The wink he made in Elise's direction was as suggestive as he was capable of. To add to his sins of irrepressible salaciousness, he leaned over and laid a light, yet firm, smack on Klara's behind. He predicted the slap coming for his face in time to catch Klara's arm. Now it was time to make Elise and never want to come back so she couldn't wonder why he'd never ended up moving. For all of their sakes, he really hoped Elise liked Erich enough not to call his bluff. Explaining how it was he'd thought he was helping by offering Elise a spot in his bed he was pretty sure he could pull off. Pretty sure. Unless she accepted the offer. Then he was fucked in more ways than he wanted to be. "Don't tell me you didn't like it," he cooed at Klara. He turned once again to the other woman. "If you were going to wait to say hi to Erich, you're welcome to come in and kill time with us. We'll all be properly dressed by the time he gets here, I promise." Klara's arm had really begun to struggle against his grip. He spun around fully so Elise couldn't see the pleading eyes he made at his unwitting partner in crime. "You'd like that, right?" "I'd be absolutely thrilled," Klara said, sounding approximately the opposite. She did stop trying to hit him, though. "No, umm, I should get to work," Elise said, giving a weak smile. "Thanks. You can give this to him." The basket shoved into his chest was heavier than he expected. Ernst held it until Elise had disappeared down the stairs, let the breath he'd been holding out, then turned around and walked it into his kitchen. He needed a minute to recover. As an apology, he first offered Klara a cigarette, which she took. Next he picked two eggs out of the bowl on his counter. Food and nicotine made it impossible to stay mad. It was a fact. "Scrambled or fried?" he asked. "Take your pants off." Food and nicotine. The answers to life. "So you'll be having the sausage this fine morning, then." "Oh, don't worry. I have plans for the eggs as well." He was going to have to kick Klara out soon. Before he fell for her. "Really now?" he asked. "Oh yes," she smiled, sweetly, walking closer. Her hands went to his waistband, her lips to his ear. "I am going to scramble them and serve them to you if in the next two minutes I don't get a good explanation for the gossip I'm going to hear about myself at work, you absolute fool." Three angry stomps later she was seated at his table. Waiting. Fried it was. "No gossip," he said. He shook his head and turned to light his stove. "I made it so all three of us look bad in case Erich wants to tell the story he hears. You really think he's gonna tell people he let me off the hook after I pulled that shit in front of the girl he's seeing?" Ernst twisted his head around enough to wink at Klara. Complete with a double tap to the side of his temple to commemorate his critical reasoning skills. "Plus," he continued, cracking the eggs on the side of the pan. He paused to listen to the first sizzle of the whites beginning to cook. That was one of his favorite sounds in the world. "I'll make sure he knows you helped cover for him." "Yeah, thanks for that," she said, her tone contradicting her words. "That poor lady made him lunch. If I'd known he was out two-timing her, I would have told." "He's helping Tanya move," Ernst said, jiggling the pan a bit. Satisfied the eggs were cooked, he slid them off and onto a plate. "Which if I were Elise, I'd be angrier about than if he did have another woman on the side." "How's that?" "You can pretend not to notice a little lipstick on the collar, you know?" Ernst laughed. "Missing body parts, that's a bit harder to overlook. What if you're alone and vulnerable with her and she decides you looked at her funny?" Ernst didn't know what to make of Tanya anymore. She wasn't bad most days. Not enough to suspect she had plans to further emasculate her coworkers, literally. Probably not. It was true she'd tried to cut a piece out of someone's brain, so he had to hope her interest in performing impromptu surgeries was short-lived. If not, that knife was coming his way one day. He went back to his stove and selected two more eggs. The morning wasn't going how he wanted. Scrambled eggs were one of his life's joys, and now they were ruined. "What do you think the chances are Erich finds a real skeleton in her closet?" he joked, once his eggs were sizzled, salted, and sent onto a plate. "Don't be mean," Klara frowned. "I've been to her place. She has a whole back of a closet stuffed with dresses and shoes. I think she wants to be a regular girl and is scared she'll be bad at it." There were too many revelations in there to process while eating eggs. Ernst would have to go one by one. "You've been to Tanya's apartment?" Klara nodded. "To help her pick out a present. And I feel so bad because I said to Kaethe it was a bit dead on the inside, and I heard she got a plant, so I might've hurt her feelings." Ernst chewed silently on his breakfast. Hearing that Klara had invented an alternative version of Tanya in her head made him feel better about something he'd noticed last night, which was Klara's alternative version of himself, who was suffering from being treated as a pretty face, waiting for that special woman who saw beyond it. "I think you're good," he reassured her. "She's managed not to care about a number of criticisms that kind of outrank her taste in decor by a pretty good margin." "No, like…" Klara stood up and took their plates over to the sink. "Just because you're really tough one way doesn't mean you are on everything. Maybe she's sensitive she's bad at being girly and doesn't know how to tell anyone. I'm going to get her to come out with us and I'll tell all the other girls to be really nice." The emotional savior complex was very endearing, in Ernst's opinion. As long as it wasn't being applied to him, he was happy. He wished Klara the absolute best in her quest to fix the problems he could guarantee Tanya didn't feel she had. The rest of the day, alas, would have to go to fixing the problems Erich didn't know he had. Yet. Ernst knocked on his boss's door around five, dinner in hand. "Next time you decide to make me part of your lie, a little warning would help," he laughed, after being invited in. "Elise came by with this." Erich took the basket with utmost trepidation, like it might contain a bomb. "To your place? Why?" "Because apparently you told her you were helping me move, and this was our lunch." "I didn't…" Erich frowned and walked further into his house, towards his office, briefly interrupted to straighten a picture frame. Following behind him, Ernst flicked it back out of alignment, feeling somewhat vengeful in nature. From the office they retrieved a half-full glass of red wine from its resting place amid a raft of papers marked Draft - Version 1 - T. Degurechaff - in the corner. Sometimes, Ernst felt a lot of pity for Elise, competing for attention with Tanya. Normal people couldn't be expected to win against someone striving to make herself so integral to the Army she became the center of its universe. Just as often, Ernst felt pity for Erich, too. Quitting work wasn't even a guaranteed solution to escaping Tanya's gravitational pull. Without a handler interested in reining her in, the most likely outcome was Tanya got the country involved in the kind of snafu that would cause them to become coworkers all over again. She'd only done it three or four times before. So far, the best word Ernst had found to describe Tanya was inevitable. Mostly, Erich came off as something of a pessimist. Ernst knew the truth. He was in fact the only person that believed it was possible to remove Tanya and the changes she'd wrought before they became permanent fixtures cemented into the foundation of whatever their country built over the next generation. It was a war for the heart and soul of their profession the two had been fighting for over a decade. And somehow, the unstoppable force had met its immovable object, who, with the assistance of the millions of men that had fought the Empire in an actual war and leveled out the playing field for non-magicians, was soon going to answer a question for the world's theoretical physicists. It turned out, the force and the object had a third option. The object had to give some. But the force didn't get to its end destination either. After enough attrition, they both admitted the other had a point and respected there was no way to win, so as long as they didn't have to admit they lost, they were willing to stop fighting. A permanent ceasefire had yet to take effect, but Ernst was calling it. He expected his Nobell Prize any day for his valuable observations about the laws of nature. Also, he thought they should give him the right to invent a new word for a special category of stubborn. After a pause for a solid minute in front of the re-skewed and re-straightened picture to ensure no more ghosts came to mess the alignment up, Ernst followed Erich into the dining room. He was given a seat, and got a glass of wine poured for him out of the decanter. "I didn't tell Elise I was with you," Erich said. He sat down himself and crossed his arms. "I told her I'd been roped into moving day in Moabitte again. She knows you live over there and must have assumed." "Alright, well…" Ernst sighed. He hadn't considered that possibility. "Now she thinks you did come to my place. So you should eat her food so you can tell her about it and make it sound believable." "Why did you lie to her?" Ernst swirled the wine in his glass. He was going to be in trouble very, very soon. He could feel it. "Because I thought you'd lied to her and I didn't know why so I figured I was better off going along with it." Ernst began his confession, starting with how he'd thought Elise was going to be Emil and how that led to a certain lack of clothing being involved. That made Erich curious. Not in the good kind of way. In the you got what part of your body pierced, young lady, kind of way. Personally, Ernst thought it wasn't anyone's business but his sister's what she looked like under her blouse. Their parents had disagreed. The Sauers were a good, God-fearing family. Personally, Ernst also thought God had given his parents him and Ella as a lesson in humility. By the end, most of the bottle of wine was gone, Erich's head was back out of his hands, and Ernst's stomach was trying to climb out of his body through his throat, because they'd mostly moved on to Erich wanting to talk about his day, without having completed a thorough review of Ernst's failures. Erich didn't have a bad temper, not the way you associated with Army officers. What he did have a reputation for was a certain type of intolerance. Thought-out mistakes he had a great deal of patience with. For thoughtless mistakes, no matter how insignificant, he had none. When Otto had lived in Berun for a few weeks, Ernst had seen Erich lecture his brother for using one of the nice glasses for water. Don't you think I'd put them lower down then? he'd asked. I put the everyday glasses so they're easiest to reach. Don't you think I had a reason for organizing them this way? They'd stayed on the water cup until Otto had admitted he hadn't thought about it and apologized for not applying his critical reasoning capacity to the matter of ranking the household glassware. Afterwards, Otto had confessed to him why he'd given in. Erich thought about everything. And somewhere deep down, he got insulted when you implied he might not have had any particular reason for arranging his kitchen one way and not the other. At their ages, Otto didn't find that likely to change. Otto would be surprised the next time he came around. For about the past year, Erich had been getting better about it, little by little. You could still tell he really wanted to say something, but sometimes, miraculously, he didn't. Maybe Elise had said something to him about it. It was funny how that worked, once you cared about someone else's opinion as much as your own. Ernst split the last of the wine between their glasses, listening along to the part of the story where the homosexuals got involved with a laugh he didn't feel. This wasn't a taking-the-wrong-glass-from-the-cabinet kind of mistake. Don't people think? Does anyone think? Why did you think that would be a good idea? Ernst knew the multiple variations of the same question were a good sign. They meant Erich was exasperated. They meant he had hope for you, and you'd be promptly forgiven once he'd lain out in fine detail why you were wrong and what you should have done, if you'd thought about it. Off the top of his head, Ernst could name almost ten ways he could have done things better. He could've just told Elise Erich had the wrong weekend, sorry, he'd been expecting his brother and wife. That would've given Elise a weird impression of Ernst's relationship with Emil and Paula, but Erich wouldn't have minded that. When you messed up in a bad way and Erich didn't take you to task for it, there was only one reason. He'd concluded there was no getting through to you, you were beyond saving, you were at best not to be trusted, and at worst an enemy. Ernst hadn't known how to explain to Tanya why it was a good thing their boss got annoyed with her every so often, when he never used to. It was for precisely the same reason he was worried Erich didn't seem so annoyed right now. "I'd be more of an idiot than you for getting angry you have my back too well," Erich explained with a shrug, after Ernst had gotten up the courage to ask. He took a bite out of the nut bread they'd retrieved from Elise's basket. "Although it's a good thing for both of us I'd never planned on needing you to provide Elise some kind of an alibi for me." They called the hospital together to get Elise on the phone and apologize, though Ernst didn't want to. He did want to apologize, except in the back of his mind he thought Elise might find it inherently suspicious that Ernst's first reaction was to lie on behalf of some other woman, no matter how many times Ernst or Erich swore it wasn't like that. By the next weekend, Ernst figured he was off the hook. Elise hadn't blown up over it once she wasn't at work and was allowed to speak her mind. He sighed happily into his coffee cup. Normally, he avoided the stuff if he could. This week he hadn't slept a whole night through. He hadn't even brought any girls home, because he'd been too afraid he wouldn't have a home the minute Erich realized Ernst had ruined his ability to bring a certain girl home. His eyes flicked up to the woman making drinks behind the counter. Plain, but he didn't think that was all there was to her. She carried herself with a confidence that she had something good to offer the world once you got past that. "Another one?" she asked, coming towards him. "Sure," he smiled. He leaned forward just the right amount, chin resting on his palm. "What's your name?" "Emma. And I'm not interested in men, thanks." Definitely more to her beneath the surface. Ernst had gotten that part right. "But I have picked up my fair share of women," she went on, after catching the shock on his face. "So I recognized what you were after." "You, umm…" Ernst stuttered, possibly for the first time in his life having more trouble forming words than the woman with him because there were things one simply didn't say to perfect strangers in cafes and he was too tired to figure out how he was supposed to react. "Always nice to meet a fellow professional." Alright, so Emma was a bust, obviously. His senses were impaired by sleep deprivation, obviously. Emma had no concept of shame, obviously. Therefore, he could obviously ask Emma to help him scout out someone else without being ashamed by it. "Bother anyone you want," Emma dismissed, insufficiently charmed by his presence. "Except Gretchen." "Which one is she?" Ernst asked, Emma's attitude making him feel very favorable towards bothering Gretchen. Emma pointed towards the back corner, at a familiar blonde bob bent over a newspaper. He was definitely going to bother Gretchen. "What's so special about her?" "She talks to me about girl stuff." Ernst almost fell off his barstool. Almost. Against all the odds, Klara's outlandish Tanya-related theories might be correct. "Girl. Stuff," he repeated. "Really?" "No, like, the specific problems of women related to communism. Men are terrible listeners about it. No offense." The no offense had been tacked on as an afterthought and was a lie, Ernst was completely sure. Emma and Tanya had found the single point of agreement in their politics and hadn't realized the rest was approximately the opposite, he was fairly sure. And actually, they also both agreed that they didn't like Ernst Sauer all that much. Maybe they were perfect for each other. Matches had been made for worse reasons. "Also, I think she's got connections in the Red Army," Emma continued. "She sort of alluded to it at one point." "I know her, to tell you the truth," Ernst grinned. "And I'll tell you, I think Stalyn himself has heard her name." He could see Emma falling in love. He could literally see it happening before his eyes. The faraway gaze, the soft smile, the way she swooned a bit where she stood. This promised to be hilarious. Funnier than watching his nephew get confused between him and his brother. Funnier than the time he'd mailed every girl in his year at the neighboring school and invitation to the big dance one from him, and one from Emil, just to see what happened. Even funnier than the time he and Emil had gone to work as each other. Emil, apparently, had spent part of the day crying over a sad story about a dog. Ernst had done great as a veterinarian, he thought. He'd petted a lot of animals and successfully delivered a baby horse. He hoped the fun lasted. It was a pity women weren't allowed to marry each other. If they could, he, Ernst Sauer, would become a man of God for the sole purpose of officiating the ceremony. "I knew she had to be someone important," Emma nodded. "She comes in with so many other girls. She's so popular." Ernst raised an eyebrow. "There was this one who was as pretty as you'd be if you were a girl. And a nun. I think she corrupted the nun. She said the nun gave her some jewelry. And then there was the girl that Gretchen claimed she put in a wheelchair. I mean, you don't think…" Emma gulped. Unadulterated lust was an emotion Ernst had a certain talent for recognizing. The red cheeks, the unconscious lip-wetting, the slight panting. They had the whole package right there. "Emma," he whispered. "Between you and me, Gretchen's put more than one person in a wheelchair." On the subject of Ernst's pending Nobell Prize, he'd solved another question. Spontaneous human combustion did not exist. If it did, everyone in this cafe would know. "She's careful about who she lets close," he warned. "So don't scare her off. Let me work on her for you." "Oh, would you?" Emma crowed, immediately before giving him the short list of eligible prospects in the building, though by now, Ernst's focus had shifted to other people's love lives. "Hello, Gretchen," he said, approaching the other side of Tanya's table. He took the empty seat without asking. "Very funny, Sauer," she said, entirely uninterested. She barely even looked at him. "What do you want?" Between himself and God, Ernst would admit he had, in that moment, absolutely no idea what he was doing, or even why. He kind of just felt like messing around with Tanya. He kind of thought Klara might be onto something and Tanya really might need all the help she could get outside of work. He kind of thought getting Tanya to fall in love with a communist might permanently derail her desire to take down the Federation, and their boss would approve. Tanya didn't have a lot of patience for him on the best day, so he supposed he'd get right to the point. "Do you have any interest in dating?" "Not you," came the immediate response. There might have been some sleep deprivation involved in that phrasing. It was a good thing she hadn't said yes. "That came out wrong," he laughed. "I'm not really one for dating seriously myself, anyway. I'm asking for…umm…a friend." Tanya remained unimpressed. "No offense, but I doubt your friends are my type." That marked his second intentionally-offensive no offense of the day. He couldn't say Tanya didn't have a point. "Not a friend," he clarified. "Not really a friend. Not similar to me." "Still a no," Tanya said. She turned the page of her paper without looking up. Ernst settled into his chair, not ready to give up yet. "So what is your type?" he asked. "Humor me." "Don't have one." "Then how do you know my friends aren't your type?" Tanya's eyes flashed up in annoyance. "Let me assure you it's possible to rate people below zero without rating anyone above it." "Harsh, Degurechaff. Harsh." Ernst laughed again. "You wound me." "Well, if that's all you were curious about…" She left the dismissal hanging. Ernst ignored it. Her blatant insults had put him in something of a button-pushing mood, he was having good luck escaping punishment for idiocy lately, and Tanya had served up a glaring red button reading Do Not Push on a silver platter. "Alright," he sighed. She nodded confidently to herself for winning. Ernst leaned both elbows on the table, clasped his hands in front, and gave his biggest, best smile. "So I guess your type is really embarrassing, then? Something you can't tell me?" He got her. He got her. He got her. Maybe there was hope for Emma. Tanya hadn't remained completely serene at his words. A flash of something secretive had flown in to rest on her face, just for a second. Coupled with how Tanya presented herself, there was an obvious candidate for what the secret was. "Just kidding," he laughed. "Unless you wanted to confess." "I don't." For now, Ernst considered the button well and truly pressed. He wasn't quite brave enough to keep going. As he passed the bar to leave, he gave Emma a wink, leaving her with a word to wait for more news from him. Someday, when he got in the mood, he'd get Klara to tell him where the girls were taking Tanya out, get a bit of alcohol in her, and hope the old trick of pretending you already knew the secret got her to confirm it. Then, when she got flustered, he'd tell her he'd always wondered a bit about men, himself. Owing to his stellar reputation with women, she couldn't hurt him with just that much. It would be a lie, of course. He wasn't wondering. He knew. Poor Hans. He'd really tried his hardest. Gave the full effort to prove what Ernst was missing out on with sticking to one half of humanity. And that was how Ernst Sauer knew that God had put him on this Earth for the benefit of women. Only. 




 

 Who Am I To Blame You, For Doubting What You Feel?






 "Be yourself; everyone else is already taken" 
   

 
 February 2, 1932Schonenberg, Imperial Capital Berun
 
The door to apartment 322 in the building on the far end of Freiherr-vom-Stein-Straße where the road turned to dirt on the north side of the Stadtpark was a dark green, richly colored as Black Forest spruce, except where the paint was peeling. Underneath was red, beneath that, yellow, before it got down to the almost-white of bare oak. Elise hadn't repainted it herself yet, Erich knew, and might never have to, depending on how fast things worked out between them. The wear was still light, a few spots here and there that added a certain quaint charm to the place. His ended his inspection of the door and its paint to crane his neck, and halted to have a look at the ceiling. Too-bright lights made him squint; they were new; had replaced the friendly old fixtures, half of which had been out of order the last time he'd been there. The building had just been rewired to meet modern electrical demands. He'd been warned away by Elise more than once because the construction made it nearly impassable. Not today. He'd called, and she'd given him the same line as last time, but he'd come anyway. Outside, the night's midwinter chill was bitter, unrelenting, the kind that made it near impossible to get out of bed before sunrise. Doubly so if someone warm was sharing it. He didn't come often to surprise her, because they were both old enough to consider doing nothing a plan, and it was rude to interrupt plans without warning. Tonight was the exception. They hadn't seen each other in more than two weeks, so he'd come to brave the mess of electrification, which wasn't so bad, not by his estimation. There were some unpatched sections of walls and ceilings, others where the plaster hadn't accumulated enough grime to fade into anonymity, a couple stacks of debris left piled carelessly in the hall. Elise was forever oversensitive to letting him see the signs she came from a different world than he did, no matter how many times he told her he was past caring. It was hard to act that way, when he knew it wasn't so insignificant, that half or more of anyone attending their wedding would say unkind things about it to other guests behind his back. Someday, someday soon, his life would be on a smooth enough path that he could take that obstacle in stride without it making him wonder or care if he'd made a mistake. Erich knocked at the door again, a few more flecks of paint drifting to the floor when he did. A minute later he did it a third time, louder still than the first two. It was rare for Elise not to answer her door. Not when he'd accompanied it by a call of it's me with the second and it's Erich on the third, in case she'd forgotten the sound of his voice. By now, he knew her shifts at work, and when she napped after them, how on Fridays at noon she'd cook enough to last her half a week and stuff her small icebox until she couldn't slide a hairpin between anything in there, and on Wednesday mornings she'd go out on a long bike ride, no matter what the weather was, unless you asked her not to at least two weeks in advance. Tuesday nights she was usually cooking something that would double as a picnic the next afternoon, and no more. He took her to dinner Wednesday nights, most times. Just not the last two. He'd see her tomorrow, she'd already confirmed it on the phone, and still something compelled him to see her tonight. After she'd tried to surprise him with lunch the other week, he owed her back. Or maybe, for once, he could admit he missed her, no matter how much he suspected everyone he knew would find it a strange thing for him to own up to, because he missed how she made him feel about the world, and not the things he was more obviously missing. Someone to give him children, someone to keep his social calendar, someone to take care of him. Tuesday nights, she was usually cooking, and she was cooking that Tuesday night, too, if the faint sound of music he could hear through the door was any sign. It must be what was drowning his entreaties out. This time, he didn't use his knuckles to rap on the wood, but tightened his fist and banged the side of it on the door hard and loud enough to make the wood reverberate in its frame. Elise's head popped out a moment later, dark brown curls loose and falling around her face, all red cheeks and up-to-no-good smile and dancing eyes and for a moment Erich wondered if he'd interrupted her in the middle of her missing him as much as he'd missed her. Probably not. A man could dream. Definitely not, he thought, after her expression changed to something like horror, mouth falling open and eyes going wide and worried. "Elise?" he heard called from inside. "It's nothing Jakob. Give me a second." Jakob was a cousin of hers, Erich was fairly sure, which made her reaction clear. They hadn't met each other's families. Not yet. Both were sure their relatives would accept the odd match once it was to the point rings had been exchanged, and both were just as sure they'd hear more objections than they'd like if it sounded like things might still be stopped before they were too far along. Elise opened the door wider and slipped the rest of her figure out into the hall, then finally shut the door behind her. Fingers that had saved countless lives splayed out where her hands rested on the spruce-green door. They were meant for better things, far better things than he had in mind, he knew. One day, against her objections that Erich would never want her touching him again, he'd gone and spent a few hours with her while she worked. Her hands could stitch and stabilize and swaddle, he'd seen them do it, but right then all he wanted was for them to be stroked through his hair. Patients had a thousand other nurses' hands to tend to their woes, and he had hers. Only hers. He stopped himself before his mind carried itself too far away into the warm glow of lying there next to her, just before he fell asleep, world no larger than the four walls around them, her fingers a silent, comfortable lullaby as they ran gentle and soft through hair he was proud was still thick, even though a few grays were beginning to peek their way through. A room containing her cousin stood between here and there. "Hey," she said, in a soft sigh of breath. Her hands now could not figure out what they wanted with her apron, first bunching, then smoothing. "I can go if you're busy," Erich replied, one step already turning his foot towards the stairs. "Just thought I'd surprise you." His offer had been intoned hopefully, because he didn't want to go. He was a brigadier general in what was once the greatest army on this Earth. At times it was all still surreal, the life of a man much better than him. Jakob was the least of his problems. Every so often, he had to remind himself that unpleasant relatives were, on the whole, more afraid of him than he was of them, so long as he didn't show it. Elise caught the question in his phrasing, he thought. She closed her eyes and he could see the fight inside her, hands gripping her apron for another round, a deep breath, cheeks sucked in to bite between her molars, exactly the way she'd first done when she'd snatched his hand and told him he had a trench-related skin condition she could treat in the privacy of his tent. It had taken all the way until she'd begun undressing herself before he'd realized there was nothing wrong with him. Except maybe in his head. "No," she said finally, eyes open and gleaming with determination. "Hold on a minute." One moment passed and she said nothing further. In the second, he made it so neither of them could. He liked that she was tall, close to a hundred and seventy-five centimeters with the low heels of her white shoes on. It made it so he didn't have to crane his neck down so far to connect their lips. Everything about her was soft. Her lips, where her body, in its tidy white uniform, pressed against his, the light push of her hand on his chest, like she was ready to send him away up until the moment it shot up to grasp at the nape of his neck. Less delicately, he stepped her back until she was up against the door and he could taste the remains of an open bottle of red on her tongue. With sudden force, she responded by shoving him off, abrupt and almost angry. "You can't," she said. Her sleeve went to her face to wipe it off. Not her lips, but her eyes, which he belatedly realized were full of tears. "E-Elise?" he asked. "Are you alright?" "Yeah," she said, with a watery laugh. "I am, I think. I'm pretty sure I'm crying for you, actually." "I came off that desperate?" he laughed, rearranging his hair so Jakob wouldn't suspect them of indecency. "No, umm…" she stuttered. "You're nice. Really, really nice. At least to me. So I don't like thinking I'm going to hurt you. I wish there was an easier way to…" He wished he could breathe in the sigh she let out. His lungs felt deflated, the air unaccountably missing, like she'd pricked a sharp needle into each side and it was escaping faster than he could gulp it down. The tight, painful burn in his chest already knew what came next, after the you're nice, but part, and he knew exactly how it must feel to be trapped in front of an oncoming train, seeing his fate barreling down the tracks and powerless to stop it. He couldn't keep himself from wanting to try, though, in some desperate denial that life as he knew it was ending. There was no reason for her to be done with this - done with him - and the rational part of him clung to it being some kind of mistake he was making about how ominous her words sounded. "What are you on about, Elise?" he laughed again, hearing how anxious it sounded, even to him. "Is this some kind of test?" She looked up from wiping her eyes for the third time, anguish replaced by annoyance in a flash. "Don't insult me. You know I wouldn't do something like that." "Sorry," he rushed in. "Sorry, I didn't - but what is it, then? I don't understand." "Look," she said. Her hands rubbed down her face. "I was going to tell you tomorrow. Give you a proper goodbye and everything. I had it all planned out. But now you're here and I'm no good at lying and I also don't have all night, so…" She jerked her head at her door. It felt closer to rubbing lye on the wound than salt, what that implied. "That's not your cousin Jakob, is it?" he said, voice rising as he asked a question he didn't want the answer to, but needed nonetheless. He stepped towards her, flinging an arm out accusatorily towards her apartment. "I thought you were better than that." As soon as he saw her flinch and move sideways to put distance between them, it pulled him in two directions, halfway apologetic he'd scared her, halfway apoplectic she thought he'd lay a hand on her. "Now who's being insulting?" he snapped, crossing his arms and leaning back so she couldn't interpret aggression out of it. "You think I'd hit you? Really?" "You never know until you know," she said, with a shaky breath. "I expect you aren't thinking entirely straight." "Of course I'm not," he said, wishing he could make it sound sad and not sarcastic, wishing for nothing more than to regain the ability to break down in effusive tears that he'd lost who knew how many years ago, so she could see what she was doing to him. "You just told me you've been going behind my back." "I haven't, really," she replied. She crossed her arms in a mirror to him. "You never cared enough to talk about whether we were allowed to see other people." "I'm sorry I didn't think either of us were the untrustworthy type," he bit out, not sure what he was even fighting for at this point. "Sorry," she said, staring at the floor. "Sorry. You're right. I shouldn't have made this about technicalities we were above. That was unfair." She gulped loud enough for him to hear, raised her eyes back to level with him, then took a deep breath. "I haven't been…it's just one day, is all. I've worked with Jakob for a few years but there hasn't been anything more until the other day. We've had lunches or drinks together, but he does that with all the nurses, I never thought it was - but we do get along when we're out, it wasn't my intention, but we do, and I - I was going to tell you tomorrow. I wasn't really trying to go behind your back." The relief that crashed over him almost sent him to his knees. He could hear his heart throb in his ears, feel the answering flutter in his throat at knowing his next words were what counted more than any he'd said to Elise before. Jakob had gotten no further than a half-cooked dinner into her life. Everything else the two of them had was still there to be salvaged, provided he didn't mess up in the next few minutes. He wasn't far from forty. He loved Elise, he knew, like he'd never loved any woman before. Franciszka had filled a gap every boy had when they were young. Edith had filled the gap he'd always been taught the position of wife occupied in households of the type theirs would be, his perfect partner to confront society with, who hated the rituals and trappings as much as he did, but knew how to perform them, regardless, and could teach their children to do the same. Elise was different. She was less eager to please than Franka had been, had none of the ideal-match traits of Edith, Elise was made just for him, to fill in the gaps he had himself. For Elise, he wasn't an inconsequential person with a consequential last name, because she wasn't waiting for her minor-nobility Prince Charming to give her money and servants and a title. For Elise, he wasn't his rank, because she wasn't waiting for someone with the right prospects and puffed-up list of heroic, important deeds so that she could use them to affix her own position among other women with good husbands. For Elise, he only had to be himself, and she could handle the rest. The impetus he'd lacked for the last year appeared to him in a brief flash, the sense that winning her back was his biggest problem, before all else, that nothing else really mattered if he couldn't do that. He'd been silent too long, though, and her hand was on the door. That couldn't be how they said goodbye, at least, if that was what this was, and it shouldn't have to be. All Elise wanted was a promise, and that was easy enough to make, if not making it meant she would leave. "Elise, wait," he called. "Let's talk about this." She turned back to him. "I don't think so," she said. "We both needed a break from life after everything that happened. I've loved the time we spent together. But I'm ready for something more. And you're not. That's not either of our faults." "I can be ready, if you want me to be," he begged. "We can go to the courthouse when it opens tomorrow. I've been trying to make it so you, and our children, God willing, can get as much of my time as you deserve after we're married, that's all. It's not because I'm not sure. So if you want to get married first and you can put up with me solving the rest after, we can…we can do that." He heard her knob turn before he realized her hand was on it again. Out of the whole night, it might be the most confusing thing of all, how she could leave like she was fed up with him after she'd just driven him so crazy he'd offered to marry her the next day, which was the least thought he'd put into a decision, maybe ever. And she was ignoring it. "Elise!" he called another time. "I just…you have to say yes or no, at a minimum." "You call that a proposal?" she hissed, like an angry cat, shoulders bunched up the same as hackles. "Back up against the wall, this or nothing?" She couldn't know how much the accusation hurt, how much he had to love her for him to admit she could back him up to the wall and in a pinch, he'd choose to deny the part of him that was screaming he wasn't prepared enough, and all he wanted - all he wanted - was to be able to cry for himself again so she knew. "It's not how I wanted it to go," he mumbled out instead. Her smile was sad and sweet when she stepped closer to lay her hands on him, one cupping each cheek. "I know you've been trying," she said. Her left thumb reached out to brush along the ridge of his cheekbone, the rim of his glasses rising then falling at the end of her trail. "And it makes me so happy to know there are people in charge trying to put things right for all of us." She paused, and he couldn't hear the worst word in their language, because she hadn't said it yet. Only he felt it coming, there was no other way to end the thought, except in the eighth circle of hell, the almighty lying, fraudulent betrayal of but. "But while you're out making the rest of the world your priority, I'm your last. That was fine with me for a while. Now it's not. That's all." Her hands were hot where he took them off his face to hold. Whether he did that because he wanted to hold them close or because he needed to grasp them so he could stay grounded enough to remain upright, he couldn't say. The latter, he thought, when it occurred to him that her hands weren't hot, it was his that must be cold, all his vitality sucked away to power the struggling, sluggish gears of his mind while it fought to find a way out. Out, out, out so far it was yesterday, or maybe the week before, the month before, a year before, back to whenever it was he should have changed things. "I'll change," he offered. "Now. Is that not good enough?" She sighed. Squeezed his fingers between hers. There was a light at the end of the hall flickering and adding a quiet buzz from a failure of the ongoing electrical projects. Two elderly widows were coming back from dinner and glanced at him, then each other, before heading into their apartments. Passing gossip for old women was what he'd been reduced to. His future was falling apart in front of them and it warranted nothing more than a thirty second mention before everyone besides him moved on. "No," Elise answered, calm, so calm. "No, because you'll hate me for it one day, if I make you change right now. I know this seems sudden to you, but it isn't for me. I've thought about pushing more. I don't want it to end where you blame me for everything wrong that you think you could've solved with enough time. There's always going to be something else if you're waiting for it all to get assembled. I don't deserve that. You didn't even invite me to the Christmas party." "You wouldn't have wanted to go to the Christmas party," he objected. "No, but I'd have liked to have been invited." Her feet shuffled on the floor, back and forth two paces right and then left. "You treat this too much like your job. Like there's no reason to fight a battle we both know the outcome of. Sometimes that's alright. But I'm not your enemy. Every so often I need to feel like you're trying to fight for us, even when it's stupid. Especially when it's stupid." She stepped backwards, towards the door again. "I should've said something earlier," she said, giving a laugh, humorless and short. "Except I felt saying it would defeat the purpose. I thought I was fine with it. Really. Until something else came along, and suddenly I wasn't, and it didn't seem like some small issue, it was our whole vision of how this is supposed to go. And you never did fight for us. So I'm not sure why that should only be my job." "It's…" he began, not knowing what to say, only wanting to stop her before she left and it was done and he couldn't say anything more, because it wasn't supposed to end like this, it wasn't supposed to end at all, but definitely not in some goddamn rundown building's half-constructed hallway witnessed by bored neighbors and faulty light bulbs. "It's not your job," he continued. "Tomorrow. We'll talk tomorrow. And I promise we can figure this out. I won't resent you for making me choose." "Let's not make this harder on either of us than it has to be, Erich." Her hand turned the knob on her door halfway, then stopped. She bounded three steps over and then she was kissing him again. "I love you," he whispered against her ear, right where the curls of her hair started to cover it. "I love you, Elise." "I…" She pulled back and looked at him, her eyes shining with tears again, his so damnably dry they hurt. She loved him too, she'd told him enough times, and even now he could see it resting on the tip of her tongue. "That's not always enough, you know?" Before he could think up another argument, she was at her door, fingers creeping along dark green paint to find the knob while she watched him, bittersweet smile on her face. "I hope you find what you're looking for. Seriously. I think I have. I hear there's plenty of pretty young things at the office. I'm sure you'll do fine." That was it, the end to the last year and a half of his life and the next two decades and a half, at least, a final smile, a shut and locked door that dropped a couple more bits of paint on the carpet, his final call of her name unheeded. He stood there one minute, and then two, not moving, barely thinking. Not because he thought she would come back out, not because he was overcome with grief, definitely not because he thought he'd concoct a plan to swap places with Jakob in the next five minutes. Elise didn't make decisions on a whim. He stood there because there was nothing else to do. There was no point in going home. There'd be no one there but him. Forever. There was no point in going to a bar and trying to fill the empty space with beer. There sure as hell wasn't a point in going back to the office and wondering what he was working for, anyway. Anywhere he went was a decision. A direction. And he had no direction, nothing mattered, every choice ended the same place, a place where Elise wasn't, so there was no way to pick. He stood there even though he'd been reminded doing nothing was as much of a choice as something. He stood there for the simple fact that he was already standing there, and inertia wasn't a fundamental force of physics for nothing. He stood there until her laugh sliced through the wall to reach him, a cleaver that easily parted the bone meant to protect his heart. Then he went outside and stood there, leaned back against the sandstone of her building, a cigarette and the sound of evening traffic occupying him. Eventually, when he'd gotten so cold he wondered if he'd given up on life more than he'd realized and couldn't even summon the motivation not to freeze to death, a beggar came by for a cigarette. Erich gave him the pack and walked off to find a cab. Of all the things it could be, it was social niceties that made him move, an obedience to rules he'd known far longer than Elise, like how gauche it would be to stand there complaining about his life to a man barely making it through the winter, which he'd do if he let himself smoke with his newest acquaintance. The cab he ordered first in the opposite direction of his home, which took him by the office. He sent it further north up Friedrichstraße after he realized and reminded himself how little he wanted to go there and answer questions from whoever was still around about why he was back. Wechter and Degurechaff, it would probably be. Mr. Extremely-Happily-Married and Ms. Extremely-Happily-Unmarried, as far as he could tell. Equally bad company, in their own ways. It was quiet driving through the city, for the center at least. Night had fallen three hours ago; the damp chill in the air that presaged a round of sniffles plaguing the office had driven the nightlife crowds inside. Weisse Maus passed by out the window, blinking neon lights and music loud enough to hear its faint pulse from the street. There was no line, for the first time in his memory. Not a swarm blocking traffic, not a tail snaking its way around the block, not even a few lonely hopefuls waiting outside. Maybe it was a sign it was his night to finally go. Elise never had agreed to stay up all night with him at one of Berun's infamous clubs. Maybe it was a warning to stay away. Tonight, it would only be him and equally sad, desperate souls without anywhere that felt like home. He let the cab roll on and eventually recognized the place he'd had lunch a week and a half ago. He was in Moabitte. In all likelihood subconsciously seeking the questionable comfort of Ernst's commiseration on this matter. Not wanting to interrupt whatever evening plans the younger man has going on, Erich gave up and sighed out his home address. He briefly winced when he dropped his briefcase carelessly in the hall. It was a habit from years of exposing the leather to much worse conditions. This one was supposed to last him longer. Since he'd gotten it, he'd been good about being mindful not to mistreat it, up until tonight, yet another loss to mark down for the day. Seeking his final, lifelong refuge, the older sister who always had the answer, Erich went directly for the phone in his hallway. A bored operator connected him to a tired housemaid who promised to tell Marian he was on the phone. Erich checked his watch, backed out a few minutes - he'd reset it the other week - and decided she'd be in the middle of a multi-course dinner. In a minute, the yawning maid would return to inform him her lady would return his call at a more convenient time. He nearly dropped the phone when Marian's voice came on, cutting through the beginnings of his imagination of the conversation they would have had if she'd left dinner to talk to him, which he'd been planning on playing out over the course of a long bath and longer time spent laying in bed until he was too tired to keep himself awake. Her actual voice, gay and a bit drunk, was opposite of the serious, mothering tone he'd been hearing in his mind. "Well, what was it?" she asked, when he didn't say anything after greeting her. Saying the dreaded words - Elise ended things with me - had been much easier in his head. "How - umm - how are you?" "Fine." "How's home?" "Cold and rainy." "How's your brother?" "I never got the sense you much cared for Heinrich." "I'm just being polite," he muttered. "Ahh. so you called me during dinner because you felt like being polite." "You didn't have to pick up," he said, wishing that she hadn't. He hadn't been ready to talk to her, he didn't think. All he'd wanted was to pretend it was going to happen well enough it generated a fictitious conversation where he talked himself through the worst of it. "My sister-in-law was telling a very boring story about her childhood," Marian clucked. "So you can either tell me why you actually called or we can exchange more interesting stories about our childhood." "It's, umm…" He backed himself up to the wall. He wanted to slide down it, so he did. Pathetically, he also wanted to slide himself underneath the table the phone was on, but he was too tall. "What are you doing?" she asked. "Sitting down." "Did you put a chair in your hall?" "No." "...are you sitting on the floor?" she asked, after a beat. "Yeah," he answered, short and sullen. He knocked the back of his head against the wood paneling behind him for emphasis. "Erich," she sighed, annoyance gentling into worry. "What's wrong? This is reminding me of when you called to say the war was done." Against his will, a bitter laugh escaped him. Marian was too canny for her own good. "It's similar, I suppose," he said. "I was calling hoping you'd tell me how to move along with life, just like last time." "You didn't take my advice," she said, laughing softly in friendly reproach. "I know." "Is it work?" "Not really." "Elise?" she guessed. "Yes." "How bad is it?" was all she asked. He sat there breathing pfennigs away down the line, feeling at the cracks in his floorboards, brushing over the rough spot worn away in the finish. It must be where he paced while he was talking, confined to less than a meter of space. Telling Marian, saying it out loud, would make it irrevocable. At each sentence he tried to formulate his throat tightened up, none wanting to come out, until a measly three words escaped their airy prison, terse and stripped down as bare as he felt. "It's over." "Ah. Sorry to hear that." She paused and held silent vigil with him for half a minute. When her pointed inhale broke the quiet, he steeled himself for the questions he knew were coming. "Did she give you a good reason, at least?" "Too focused on what I've got in front of me at the office," he grumbled. "Well, are you?" He was too weak to resist temptation. He knew it was his own fault, and that was enough. He didn't need to hear it from Marian too, not today, and it was so easy to lay blame somewhere else, at the feet of a source of a thousand other problems already. One more wouldn't hurt. "Tanya's…she's right there," he said, gesticulating at the air in front of him. "What am I supposed to do?" Marian sighed noisily. It was a bad excuse. They both knew it. But Marian didn't like Tanya, never had from the start, on that she'd been dependable. Too dependable, sometimes, when nuance was required, but for now he counted on it to weigh Marian's response in favor of commiserating with him and not criticizing. "She…umm…is she really the problem?" she asked, more curious than exasperated with the falsehood. "You'd never mentioned." So caught up in telling one white lie to Marian, he'd forgotten an older, more important one. He'd yet to tell her, officially, that he was personally responsible for providing employment with the Imperial Army to someone who had no business being part of the Imperial Army if Marian had her way. He didn't want her there himself, either. He accepted it might be the case no matter what he did, so it had been prudent to plan around that, back when there'd been a plan and a point to having a plan, a future, and all that. It was too much to explain to Marian right now, when he couldn't name any motivation for any previous plan for his future with certainty. "You know…" he mumbled, finding a new person to blame momentarily. "Romel, and politics, and…anyway. She's not not a problem." There was a certain incoherence to the response he gave that was calculated, the result of surprisingly clear thinking for his position. Defeated, downcast, halfway ducked under a table like it would shield him from nonphysical harm, his mind continued to find a way out. Marian could put together "Romel" and "politics" well enough to logic out, falsely, that Erich von Lehrgen hadn't unilaterally extended his hand to Tanya Degurechaff. And Marian had just enough love for him not to publish some scathing piece about Romel and Tanya and what it meant that Romel hired Tanya, because it was a fact Erich had let go in a moment of weakness. Marian would put the wrong puzzle together, it would hold for tonight, and the harsh lecture he'd get when she learned the truth could wait for another night. What lay in the future was of little importance. "Well, I'd heard something about her being back through the grapevine," she soothed. "So whatever. Anyway, what are you going to do about things now?" "I was hoping you'd tell me." The overall ridiculousness of him calling her from hundreds of kilometers away to govern his life for him gave him a spot of ironic cheer. It was all he needed to push his way up to his feet. "The furthest I can plan right now is skipping work tomorrow. You know, I think it's been ten years since I phoned out and lied about why. I guess Elise had a bit of a point. I was going to do it if she'd ever…never mind." "If she'd ever…?" "Nothing," he said, fishing for a cigarette in his pocket before remembering he'd given them all away. Usually there were extras in the drawer he was standing in front of, but there were none there either. "It doesn't matter." Dwelling on the fun he would have had with Elise going out all night to a club they didn't fit into and then calling out from work to lie in bed all day following it had destroyed the flicker of humor that had gotten him on his feet. "You can talk about it even if it doesn't matter," Marian offered. "I won't hang up because you're boring me. I swear." It was generous, for Marian, taker of calls during dinner to avoid bad conversationalists, Marian who used to tell him that if he wasn't at least as tough as her he'd fail out of cadet school. He was afraid despite her words that she'd laugh and say his idea had been stupid anyway, and more afraid she wouldn't, and after he'd let a little bit out, a lot would follow. More than he wanted, maybe more than he even realized was there waiting to be told to someone. "I'm fine, Marian," he objected. "Or, not fine, but well enough. I just needed a break from my own thoughts for a bit." "You should go to work tomorrow," she told him. "I'll be distracted half the day." "And the other half, work will distract you," she sniffed. "It's better than moping around the house." He agreed he'd go, knowing she'd call someone to check. Somehow, he fell asleep. Somehow, he woke up, got out of bed, got dressed, and found himself in his chair. He was right about being distracted, and wrong about how much. The next day was much the same. By Thursday evening when he was wincing once again at the sound of his briefcase hitting the floor, he couldn't remember a single thing he'd done the past two days, like time had rewound to when he'd come home forty-eight hours ago. Friday was better only for being busier. After three grudging bites of lunch, all the pointless thoughts about what the past should have been so that the future might have been weren't content to wait their turn any longer. He glanced down at the bratwurst rolling around the plate under his fork. The thought of eating more was sickening, the thought of daydreaming fruitlessly while sitting stiff in his seat impossible. Back against the wall, seated on the warmest part of the floor he could find, probably over the ducts that went to Romel's office - thinking about the big boss miserably sweating through his meetings just to make his guests suffer coaxed a smile out of him, just for a second - Erich propped his arms on bent knees and let distraction win for a few minutes. A startled gasp of "what in the-," took him out of his internal locus very suddenly. Stuck in memories of the past, it was jarring to match it to how Tanya's voice sounded now, all modern Berun woman for a moment because he'd shocked her out of her formal tone and into a lilt he recognized as the rise-fall-rise of Elya saying what in the world? when you'd surprised her. "I-," he brushed his sleeve back to get a look at his watch and noted he'd grossly miscalculated how long his minutes were, and grossly underestimated how distracted he'd let himself get if he'd missed the sound of Tanya knocking, since she always knocked when the door was closed, then opened it a sliver, then more, so long as he didn't shake his head at her. "I thought I locked the…" He paused again and tried to collect his thoughts. "No, that was yesterday. Sorry." The sheepish smile he gave didn't alleviate the look of grave concern on her face. There was no way she could understand, he thought, shaking off memories from years ago. Just like he could never understand her, he used to think, until two days ago when there'd been a few minutes of riveting clarity. Purpose - blinding, overwhelming, all-consuming purpose - had overcome him when he'd thought he might save his relationship from its death throes. Purpose that made him think he'd never known the meaning of the word before, purpose that brushed all the rest to the side and cut a clean, straight line between where he was an where he wanted to be, purpose that made him wonder why anything else had ever felt more important than fighting for what he wanted, purpose of the like he expected Tanya was intimately familiar with. It was a good feeling, having that, the best sort of drug. He was only beginning to understand what it must be costing her to let a bit of it go. "Is everything alright?" she asked, and she sounded actually concerned he might not be, or was faking it well. "Yeah," he sighed, followed by a deep breath in. "One minute and we can get to work." "No," she said. It came out strident, almost desperate. She untensed before she continued. "I'd rather know what's on your mind, if it's no bother." He hesitated. Bringing up romantic pursuits with her, especially failures, wasn't bothersome so much as potentially embarrassing. Mind made up, he patted a fringe of the rug off to his right. She needed less single-minded purpose, he thought he might benefit from a bit more, and because they couldn't open their hearts or souls or minds or wherever all that was contained and swap out bits and pieces, he'd have to settle for having her teach him how to make it come out more often or how to hold onto it a little longer. He wondered if she didn't know the answer herself, and that was why she clung to hers, fear that it wouldn't return and nothing else life offered could quite substitute for feeling like you'd found your God-given purpose. After a brief taste of temporary, objective-based purpose he was ready to beg Tanya for advice on how to get more. But he damn sure wasn't going to do it while she stood looking down at him with her arms crossed. She was the hesitant one now. After a moment, she walked back to the door, held up a finger, with a call of "give me a minute, Wechter," and locked them in, like he thought he'd done before. Reluctantly, she seated herself at a comfortable-but-not-unfriendly distance, and now it was his turn to make a move again in the endless game it sometimes felt like they'd been playing. They'd count the next half hour as a time-out, he supposed. 
 xXx 
In regards to her boss's journey to remind her he was, besides her boss, also a human being by the name of Erich von Lehrgen, Tanya felt she'd been very receptive over the past year. In fact, she'd go so far as to say she'd begun to understand why other people valued some amount of personal connection to key colleagues. Sitting on the floor of the office in the middle of the day staring off into space together, she was starting to think things were getting out of hand. Doing shots in the middle of the work day together was altogether less atypical. You could do shots with a perfect stranger in the middle of the day if you were the type who enjoyed engaging in such misdemeanors. For the fact that she and Lehrgen were currently doing absolutely nothing, it felt suspiciously like they were doing something together, and that something was outside the bounds of friendly coworkers by anyone's definition. Tanya's fingers picked at the fraying edge of the rug they were sitting on to give her anxiety over this development a place to go. She was well-versed in the perils of being friends before colleagues. And maybe it was hubris, but she believed herself capable of avoiding the pitfalls, so long as she was careful, and so long as she gained sufficient reward from the risk. In this case, she was looking for answers. Seeing a man in charge of weighty military matters in such a dejected state was, of course, distressing for her. While she was aware there were several reasonable explanations for his behavior that didn't spell doom - for her at least - she doubted she'd get a solid night's sleep for years without a definitive response. The strange way Lehrgen had been staring at her hadn't felt promising. And given how her last two decades had played out, she liked to think her paranoia had some justification behind it. He sighed with a certain Erich-ness that made her paranoia feel entirely justified, not a heavy exhale alone but one that began with a slightly vocalized grunt. Tanya recognized it as the sigh he'd made up his mind to have a conversation with someone he dearly wished he could avoid. "Have you ever had feelings for someone else?" While her outward reaction betrayed a negative shock at being asked such a direct question on her private business, which was appropriate to the professional setting, inwardly her feelings were more of a mixed bag. She was suitably pleased to learn this moodiness was over some romantic woe of Lehrgen's. That meant she was in the clear. "Well…" she stalled, not sure what answer was best, as seemed to be happening more and more often lately, forcing her to resort to an unbecoming level of workplace honesty. "Not like this." She gestured in his direction to indicate that his forlorn state was what she was disavowing any experience of. Obviously, having made attempts at relationships in her past life, none of them permanent, she had a general level of familiarity with unpleasant outcomes. Primarily, she was accustomed to being mentally at a loss rather than emotionally, unlike her dear colleague. On paper, she'd been something of a catch, if she could say so herself. She hadn't lacked for opportunity when it came to partnership. She'd applied the same level of care and selectiveness in choosing female companionship as she had with the decisions that had taken her up the ranks of the HR department, to no avail. Ultimately, she'd deduced that the discrepancy in outcomes based on the same approach came down to a simple fact: in order to earn her keep, she required a job, which meant she required coworkers. She did not, however, require romance. Thus, when it came down to making a periodic review of the relationship, she was forced to conclude the complexity it brought to her life outweighed the benefits. Tanya expected she and Erich could find plenty to commiserate on over what it felt like to be a man in your late thirties who hadn't made it work in spite of possessing all the requisite tools. She also expected that explaining why she knew how that felt would derail the conversation into a debate about how urgently she required psychiatric care. Eager to escape any accidental reminiscing, she figured it was best to reiterate she had no useful advice to give. "Sorry," she said, shaking her head. She couldn't help a small laugh at herself. "I certainly wouldn't know more than you about how relationships are supposed to go. I fear I'm likely a net negative on that front." "The blind leading the blind," he chuckled. "I've got no idea where to go from here. And sometimes, I think…I mean, Tanya, I'm almost forty, I…" "It's not that old," she objected. She'd felt at the top of the world in his shoes. Then again, that was modern Japan for you. She'd been years short of what she estimated would be her life's midway point. "I guess," he said. After his noncommittal agreement, she caught the motion of him shifting slightly in the corner of her eyes as he stretched his legs in front of him. "Only sometimes I wonder if I'm doing something so wrong I'll never be able to make it right." There wasn't much for Tanya to do besides shrug. Whether or not he was doing something wrong, an accurate assessment of commendable competencies versus areas for growth wasn't something she was qualified to give in this arena. Regardless, she felt compelled to offer a piece of appropriately-meaningless-sounding wisdom, lest he think she agreed he was useless and should give up. It was possible that was the case, but she'd win no friends by saying it. "Well, I don't think there's any reason to rush things because you think time's running out," she said. As advice, it was perfect. It sounded reasonably helpful, yet because of her age, there was no way Lehrgen would take it to heart. Therefore, she couldn't be blamed for any consequences related to him taking it. "But," she went on, with a small laugh, "what would I know?" Her boss rather disturbingly continued looking at her like she might know things. She did, indeed, know one thing: she was a terrible person to get dating advice from. "How are you so…" he began, betraying another Erich-ism when he paused to sigh and slowly push his thumb and forefinger under his glasses where they rested on his nose. It wasn't annoyance, as rubbing at the brow might suggest and had been a source of concern for Tanya the first few times he'd done it. Rubbing with his knuckles meant the person he was speaking to was being difficult. What he was doing now - circling two fingers slowly up, out across his brow, then under his eyes to pinch at the bridge of his nose and restart the process - was more along the lines of saying he'd thought about the topic at hand far past the point of mental exhaustion. "...how are you so brave all the time?" he finished. As she doubted little old Tanya and her all-part-of-the-game displays of wartime bluster occupied a permanent residence in the mind of one Erich von Lehrgen, the source of his mental anguish clearly had to be something else. Those commitment issues Elya thought Tanya would care to hear gossip about, if she were to hazard a guess. Or rather, how to stop having them. She couldn't help but give an unladylike snort to the question. She was an abject coward, thought the world would never know it. "I'm not brave," she objected. "I know what I want, know what it takes to get there, and refuse to let myself get distracted. It's different." "Not from where I stand." Lehrgen glanced down momentarily at his lap. "Or - umm - sit." The compliment took her aback more than it was meant to, mostly for the fact that she couldn't convince herself it was the usual empty platitude offered after self-deprecation. First off, she wasn't the one in need of comfort there. Beyond that, she'd stated her case as a matter-of-fact correction, not a dejected judgment that cried out for pity. Adding to that, Lehrgen wasn't unqualified to assess the matter of soldierly conduct, nor was he disillusioned after she'd broken down the logic behind it. Courageous was a trait Tanya had a hard time fitting into the mold of a person whose overarching life goal was to obtain a comfortably-stable income in a comfortably-stable economy, living with as little inconvenience and few obstacles as was feasible. That was about as insipid as a person could get. Before she could fully explain the apparent discrepancy to herself, Mr. Feeling Talkative had moved on. "And what does Tanya Degurechaff want in the end, anyway?" he asked. Tanya resisted the urge to adopt a similarly defeated-looking posture as her companion, knowing she couldn't give a good answer. Even an attempt at honesty - get above the rat race, or something like that - sounded like a cop-out to an earnest question. It had been more years than she could count since she'd been asked that question as more than a formality, by someone she couldn't claim to know more about life than, who would have opinions on her answer because they had some of their own that she had to respect. When someone dug into it, what she wanted was what everyone wanted. That disqualified it as being an answer to what "Tanya Degurechaff," as a person, might want, after it was all finished. Presumably, most people felt the same as she did. Her default response was as much a non-answer as saying you wanted food to the waiter taking your order, insofar as it gave no further information about who you were as an individual person. Most unfortunately, her planned future for self-discovery had been stolen from her by a tag team appearance of the top competitors in the category of 'overreacting immaturely to the words of the former Takada Daisuke.' "I'm not that complicated," she finally answered. "I want to be able to do what I'm best at and be recognized for it. And compensated accordingly. I find that very fulfilling." After a moment, it occurred to Tanya those words could land her in hot water if said to the average person and what they knew of her résumé. Her work history still made it out that she was most suited to an in-person role killing people, rather than planning how to make that happen from a remote location. Or preferably not at all. "Although, to be clear," she said, squinting towards Lehrgen with all requisite suspicion. "You think I'm best at office work, right?" "I like to think so, at least." The ghost of a smile passed over his face. "Do you feel I compensate you accordingly for that being the case?" In all her previous experiences with pay raises, "giving up" was what the company did for her. As in, giving up more money. Never before had the onus been on Tanya, giving up the part of her that was dying to take the bait when the other party was showing weakness and the offer was practically on the table after she wrote in a number and signed. However, they were talking about the person willing to vouch that paper-pushing was her primary talent. She didn't need that revised down to number two, outranked by emotionally manipulative behaviors. "I hope you aren't suggesting I'm only here for the money," she joked, though there was an element of serious entreaty to it. Managers were irrationally fond of the belief that their employees' first-line response to why are you here? wasn't because you pay me to be. One glance at Lehrgen's general aptitude and family background was enough to show he wasn't in it for the money himself. Tanya's fairly standard response earned more of a laugh than it had a right to. Her boss's mental state, it would seem, remained questionable. Her eyes went back to the carpet; its yellowing edges and he red threads spanning the distance between she and Erich worn thin. "Okay, what do you want besides work?" he asked. "Work and whether it's more war or more peace or all that. That doesn't count. We all care about that. But that's..." He paused for a moment. Considered. She watched him do it, knowing he was going to give some kind of spiel about things he didn't have to care about as much as she did. "I'm talking about what makes you feel alive, besides that," he said. "I mean, we all want to keep on existing in a country that matters, one way or another." There was no reason for wanting to pace, except that she'd tried to escape answering the question and had been told off with the exact same reasoning she'd use against herself. Tanya forced herself to remain still. She didn't owe anyone else an answer to that question. "Well, for now, everything else is secondary, I hope you can understand," she said, looking his direction. "Fine, but…" "I don't know," she sighed. She drew her knees closer in and draped her arms over top. "I'm fine with how things are right now, I guess." Absent a good answer, she did her best to at least make her smile charming when she bestowed it on the man in no small part responsible for the acceptable state of affairs. Regardless, she sensed disappointment in her uninspired response. The rolled eyes made it rather hard to miss. "Were you expecting something different?" she ribbed lightly, knowing his opinion on her natural set-point of work-life balance. To Tanya's estimation, the harrumphing, shrugging reply she got was meant to communicate something along the lines of no, I was only hoping. Never had she failed so repeatedly on the same subject. "As long as you swear yourself to secrecy, fine," she began, feeling unusually humored at the thought she could get away with saying something fantastically insane and wanting to end the constant haranguing that wasn't going to end until one of them changed tack. "I guess I can tell you. I'm really just biding my time until I've gathered what I need to go take on God in single combat." Lehrgen's initial response was laughter. Followed by a mutter of "don't mess with me, I half believe you." Then more laughter. "Good, I'm half-serious," she said, in a voice that plainly indicated she wasn't. "Well," he sighed, breath returning to normal, "let me know. I'll start a betting pool. Thinking about it, your main talent is actually doing things no one in your position should be capable of. I might lay my odds on you." "You might?" she sniffed. "How fickle." As he did when Sauer made a bad joke, Lehrgen went to give her a knock on the shoulder with his fist. A moment of panic set in on his face right before impact. Apparently deciding last-minute he couldn't give a friendly arm punch to a woman, the motion transformed into his hand landing down to squeeze her shoulder with enough force to send a jolt of shock her way. "You never really answered my question, you know," he said, relaxing his hand after using it to give a lighter pat of apology to her offended limb and then retreating back against the wall. "How do you keep from second-guessing yourself all the time?" "You don't seem to have a serious issue of it," Tanya said, at the implication the scope of his ailment was broader than romantic commitments. "I don't make it obvious," he muttered. "But the work I submit specifically, what I'm working for generally, shit, what the future's heading for with you, is this the right relationship for me, how should I decorate my house, which glass of champagne on the tray is best, it's…it's everything." Right. If they were still undecided on home renovation choices on a house no one else lived in after discussing it almost a year ago, her erstwhile patient had a more critical case than she'd initially diagnosed. "Okay," Tanya said, taking a slow inhale to process what she'd learned. Her track record of dealing with emotionally irrational individuals in the workplace left something to be desired. Trust Being X to use a friend to try to assassinate her this time. "Sorry," he went on. "That was a lot. Just, I don't know anyone who second-guesses themselves less than you, so…" "That doesn't sound entirely like a compliment," she said, crossing her arms. He barked out a short laugh. "It's not, usually," he said. "But for now it is." Her gaze drifted up to the ceiling while she ruminated on their disparate reaction to being given choices. The line about the champagne gave her a clue. She was dealing with someone accustomed to the luxury of waiting for better options. No one would call her hedonist, but if a tray of bubbles presented itself to her, she'd be happy enough to take one without the question of which entering her mind. Now, her eyes went to consider Lehrgen, and whether he'd want to hear her answer. Regrettably, there was no nice way of telling someone their problem was being spoiled by life. Because she wasn't in the habit of vacillating on her decisions, Tanya quickly made up her mind not to say a word. "Right," she said. She stood up slowly and brushed herself off. Fleeing the scene wouldn't make her excuse very convincing. "That's a big question. I'll think about it and get back to you." "Hey," she heard, as she was turning towards the door. "You realized something." On second thought, fleeing the scene had its attractions. She lamented the distance remaining to the exit. "I realized there wasn't an easy answer," she said, rather truthfully. "Hey," she heard again, with warning in the tone, along with the sound of Lehrgen scrambling to get up. "Tanya." Her hand was almost on the key when the desperate brush of an outstretched hand reached her shoulder blade and froze her in place. That made it impossible to pretend she didn't realize he wanted her to stay. She turned around after getting control of her heart rate. All her hard work at building goodwill could be gone in the blink of an eye. It was precisely why she hated letting anything get personal about work. "What?" she asked. "I told you, I-," "I can tell the difference between you trying to find an answer and trying to find how to word the answer," he said, glaring at her crossly. "At least, if you aren't trying to hide it." Her mistake had been in not realizing she'd find a legitimate answer, nor one that needed hiding. Their informal chat had lowered her guard. "I would appreciate some time to think about how to give my feedback in a constructive manner," she said, sounding more smooth than she felt after being caught flat-footed. "I won't hold the delivery against you," he replied, beckoning for her to speak with a wave. "That might be difficult." "That bad?" he asked. "Now I have to hear or I'll drive myself crazy wondering." Tanya gave an intentionally audible sigh and chose her next words carefully so as to inflict maximum damage. At this point, she'd take off-guard and defenseless over combative and defensive. "Your life is too good. That's your problem. It's like being incapable of being happy on vacation because a world without vacation doesn't exist, so all you can do is worry you chose the wrong spot." As expected, her opponent couldn't form an immediate counteroffensive to her shock and awe campaign. That gave her the space to shore up her position by explaining herself before the bitterness set in. "I don't mean to trivialize things. I see the work you put in, I know it isn't easy, you are commendably concerned with proving you deserve what you've been given, and-," she paused, the bit that had been eluding her coming to mind, "-and that's your real problem." Her basic conundrum entering this conversation had been how to explain the life of someone who sounded like a spoiled brat in a way that didn't sound like she was accusing Lehrgen of being one. Really, he was suffering from an over-awareness of his good fortune rather than the opposite. How many times had she seen him slaving away trying to arrange things to be just so? Sauer had correctly pointed out the personality trait to her long ago - in the vast majority of cases, their boss expected to be able to arrange things for himself so they all worked out nearly perfectly so he could have his cake and eat it too, and was frighteningly good at doing it. He'd recovered enough to squint at her instead of blinking slowly, so she swiftly pressed her advantage. "Instead of being unaware of the privilege you hold, you're burdened by how to use it correctly," she guessed. "I think you're probably holding yourself to an impossible standard." "Degurechaff, I swear to God, if there is one person I am not willing to hear a lecture about impossible personal standards from…" "No, no," she objected, answering another question for myself about why someone who often seemed so similar to her would occasionally surprise her by being the opposite. "That's different. I set high but achievable standards, and your argument is that the cost of achieving them is greater than the benefit. And I'm willing to admit you may have a case there, so hear me out." He didn't say anything, which she took as permission to continue. "I imagine you don't often have to take what you can get. Do you want a job that's stable or one that's interesting? Why shouldn't it be both? Do you want to spend money on things you want now or retire comfortably? You can do both. Do you want to spend time with friends or make business connections? They're the same people. Would you rather clean the bathroom or the kitchen after work? Neither, that's what housekeepers are for. It's a nice life." Tanya took a deep breath and moved along to dropping the other shoe, rather proud of her deductive skills. She would definitely be asking for that raise later, now that she'd saved him a trip to the psychiatrist. "Except then, it becomes: should I hit this strategic objective or that one, should my country abide by our agreements or empower itself, should I have the right woman for me or the right kind of one for my position, or something like that, I expect, and it might not be possible to have both, and you're searching for a unicorn and thinking it's your fault you can't find it." "Yeah, I, well, that's…" he stuttered out, indicating she'd hit the nail directly on its head. "I don't often second-guess myself because the standard I'm measuring against is whether my choice made the best use of the tools I had to achieve my goal. What life could look like if I didn't have to choose is irrelevant. I've never had that luxury. And if that's your expectation, then reality is always going to leave a gap making you wonder what if." "Well, what if…" Lehrgen began, regaining his capacity for coherent speech after the closest Tanya had gotten to spearheading a combined arms assault in four years. "What if you're wrong about what you think you want?" "Then you have that information for next time and you adjust," she said, happy to be thrown a softball. "But what if you're wrong because you've gotten it so backwards you adjust in the wrong direction?" "Then I guess you ruin your life, except I thought I was talking about me and you and what works for us, not giving advice to an alcoholic drinking away their last rational thought." "You're right," he relented. "Actually, you're so right I'm having trouble accepting how obvious it sounds, now that you've said it. I…" Tanya glanced at his clock when he looked at the floor. She hated dealing with other people's emotions. Ever since Erich had asked her about herself, she'd been itching to leave. "Fair enough," she said, hoping he'd finish. "Thanks," he continued, dropping into his chair like he was exhausted. "Really. I don't know what I expected but it wasn't…Thanks for trying. And succeeding. I mean, unlike you I'm not sure I can just decide not to have inconvenient thoughts, but it's something. A start." "Glad to be of service," she sighed, feeling conflicted. Jealously, she didn't particularly want Lehrgen to resolve the root cause of his relationship mistakes. Time was a fixed quantity, and how much of it any one person could demand was therefore necessarily a zero-sum game. Presently, she was the beneficiary of more of her boss's time than she'd get if he had someone else he wanted to spend it with. For example, he wouldn't bring coworkers along to a Christmas party were he to have a wife. Better yet, feeling like a failure in one area often led people to concentrate their energy on what made them feel successful. Helping a rising subordinate-turning-friend with her career would be an easier sell the worse he felt about his track record on other projects. It was a wonder he wanted to be friends with her, given how she tended to approach the relationship. Tanya unlocked the door but didn't open it. Whether she was dismissed or not wasn't entirely apparent. "What did you come in for, anyway?" "Oh," she remembered. "Right. Quantifying all the data we got from the last decade. Results are starting to come in. Every other week, lunch at Café Krone. That's what we decided, yes?" Lehrgen did not look remotely pleased to be reminded he'd promised her a friendly ear on this project, nor that he had more working coming his way. Nonetheless, he nodded. "Great." Tanya knocked on his desk for emphasis. "I'll go block off a standing reservation." On her return to her own office, she stopped by to check in on Wechter, still wiping a stubborn bit of dust off the side of her formerly-pristine black pants. She muttered out the name of her boss as a bit of a curse for inflicting the indignity of stains and wrinkles on her clothing. As for the latter, she did her best to straighten her attire back into compliance. "What was it you wanted earlier?" she asked, not looking at Wechter. She'd resorted to licking her thumb to try to rub out whatever mysterious floor substance she was dealing with. "It's…nothing," he sighed. "I can't even remember. You should go take care of that." "Right," she replied, concentration as of yet on improving her slightly disheveled state. "Yeah. Let me know if you remember something important." Once Tanya was alone behind a closed door, the strain of enduring the last hour or so made itself known. The emotional vulnerability had remained a one-way street, thankfully. Regardless, dealing with it successfully had been a task in and of itself. She took a certain amount of pride in having done so. That had been all her, off-the-cuff and unreliant on her usual crutch of the mental calculations she used to reach the outcomes she wanted. Beyond confirming that Lehrgen's troubles weren't going to soon become shared troubles, which had happened early on, she hadn't wanted anything particular out of the conversation. With the possible exception of leaving it. Tanya opened her door once more, as soon as she realized how badly she wanted to sink into her chair and lay her head on her desk. She had an errand to run, and a weekend of rest in the near future. After reserving a table into perpetuity at Krone, she was still feeling lethargic. If she needed a momentary rest, it would have to be somewhere other than her workplace. With her luck, Lehrgen would come by and she'd have to figure out how to apologize for finding it exhausting to deal with him. Luckily, Visha was nearby with a private room, and even a bed. "Surprise," she announced, peeking her head through the door. Visha was laying on her bed, arms raised in the air with a book above her head. "I was over this way for something, and…" All of a sudden, merely finishing her sentence felt like too much. Now that she was somewhere safe, an internal switch had flipped and cut the power to all systems. A worsening crescendo of pressure felt like it was filling her lungs with lead. Without asking for permission, she dropped herself down next to Visha to let it pass. "Tanya?" she asked, book going away. "Are you…?" Yes, she'd planned on replying to the obvious missing word. She was alright, simply wiped out from overexerting an underused muscle. A breath in, the sensation of a consoling palm on her upper back, and her response came out neither like she wanted it to nor in a way that she had an easy time claiming was alright. There was a sharp, painful feeling of there being too much wrong for her to calmly inspect, categorize, and put away. Ironically, in spite of her total capacity for such processing being perfectly sufficient to see her through all manner of unpleasant events going on around her, dealing with someone else's irrationality had used up Tanya's specific capacity for dealing with her own. It was one single gasp, and all of maybe four tears, that came out to relieve it. By Visha's reaction, you'd have thought Tanya had spent four hours sobbing inconsolably. The other woman was substantially more agitated than Tanya was once she'd rubbed a hand across her cheeks, and kept repeating "it's okay," long after Tanya was demonstrably okay, as well as shushing her despite the fact she wasn't making any noise. "Visha," she finally said. "I'm fine. I'm just tired and I'm probably starting my period in a day or so and…" She shrugged, knowing Visha would accept the explanation. Elya had forced her to join enough conversations on the subject that Tanya had learned her complaint was a shared one. Emotionally, the main change she noticed was a tendency to take negativity a touch harder for a day or two than she otherwise would. Contrary to her expectations, that was not deemed an exonerating explanation for her behavior. The arms Visha had wrapped around her from behind tugged her backwards onto the bed before she could react. Very unfairly, Visha completed the maneuver by pressing Tanya's face into her chest, and upon further reflection, leaving to get back to work didn't feel that urgent. She did feel guilty taking advantage of her good fortune, but that didn't stop her from swinging her legs up onto the bed so she could lie down properly. Once Tanya closed her eyes, and ignoring that her shoes were on, she felt like Takada Daisuke again. He'd had a girlfriend just for fun. Two, actually, because it was college and everything hadn't been about the future, yet. Tanya's situation didn't remind her of the moments of having a girlfriend she might be expected to miss. It felt more like what came after the real fun - huddled up next to someone who wanted to hold her for reasons she'd never quite understood, mostly exhausted, only a quiet echo of former desire, just enough to remind her it had once been there. It was strange. Something was off. The same something that had put her into this admittedly unobjectionable cuddling posture. She missed her old life all the time. Almost every day. The creature comforts, the stability, the control, it might not be large, but inevitably, whether it was being too short to reach a high shelf or waking up from a bad dream about a bullet storm, she'd have a thought drift through her head. This would never happen if… She missed her old life constantly. And yet somehow, she felt like she couldn't remember the last time she'd missed being Takada Daisuke. On one hand, that made perfect sense. The creature comforts, the stability, the control, those had all been taken from her. But she couldn't miss what had never gone anywhere, and her core being was still right there, alive and mostly well. That, then, led to a conundrum - as nothing material had changed in the past few hours, there was no reason to rue the loss of her former life any more or less than usual. Eighteen and a half years ago, her name had changed. Her initials hadn't. Nor had her approach to life, her outlook on it, what she wanted from it- What does Tanya Degurechaff want in the end, anyway? sounded in her mind, far more accusatory in her replayed memory than the deeply friendly overture it had been from one person to another. Visha's hand paused momentarily on Tanya's head, and she noticed she'd tensed up. She forced herself to relax, and Visha went back to stroking her hair after she didn't say anything for a time. She'd answered Lehrgen's question precisely the way the man who'd died by way of the southbound train on the Yamanote line on Platform 5 of Tokyo Station would have answered it. She'd also known when she'd given that answer that it had been insufficient to address the intent of the question, and she had no easy way around it. As an individual who held reason in high regard, Tanya tried to behave as a reasonable person would. Therefore, she governed her time and efforts in a reasonable way. Insane as those massive logical leaps might sound. What did she want? What had a Japanese salaryman in 2013 wanted? What did it matter until either had the means to make the life they wanted? If someone living on the edge of hunger wanted to own a ten billion yen yacht, it was equally as irrelevant as if they wanted to donate ten billion yen to charity. They were equally as unable to do either. You acquired the means to achieve a set of basic hopes and dreams and all the rest, and then you went about acquiring more than those. The other way around didn't make any sense. That accumulated you a handy list of things you couldn't do or have, instead of the funds you needed for them. As all responsible adults should, she'd put away her youthful aspirations when she'd entered the workforce, to be taken back out and re-examined when the time was right. Once she'd earned the privilege of doing so. Perhaps the bar she'd wanted to clear was higher than most, but the principle of it was the same. And then, right on the cusp of crossing the finish line, her life had become something of a literal trainwreck. Of course, she still planned on working herself back to that former point. Who she was and what her goals were had remained unchanged between lives. Except now, when she got there, and the time came to tag player one back in, he wouldn't be there. Someone else would. She had to breathe again. She sucked down some air, Visha's fingers stilled a second time, and case in point, what Tanya Degurechaff wanted in the end could never be the same as what Takada Daisuke would have, because he'd definitely want something different from the woman next to him right about now, and- "Do you want to talk about it?" Visha asked softly. She took another deep breath. Her previous result with speaking in this state being what it was, Tanya opted to shake her head without comment. She didn't need to worry Visha any more than she already was. Over time, Visha had made it clear enough she didn't consider Tanya the human avatar of perfection. And yet, Visha was happy to be around her, flaws that she might have, when Tanya wasn't trying to be anyone besides herself. Critically, in light of recent events, she was also happy to accept Tanya's word on who that person was without further explanation. As she'd also been forced to justify over Christmas, Visha was relaxing to be around. Another minute or two, and then she'd get up and go back to work. Tanya adjusted her head a bit and started counting down the seconds. "Hey," was the next thing she remembered hearing, after her own internal count of forty-five. The weight in her eyes told her she'd been sleeping. "It's been twenty minutes." Tanya sat up as quick as she could, ignoring the scratch of cheap bed linens. "I wanted to let you keep sleeping, but I didn't think you'd forgive me," Visha said, pushing up to a seat herself. "That's why you're the best," Tanya told her. She flashed an easy smile, mood substantially improved. Her power nap had reset things back to normal. Looking at it more objectively, this realization had been somewhat overdue, and the truth was, it didn't count for much at the time being. There was some erosion beneath the foundation, but the house was standing just fine and the same as it had since it was built. Obsessing about things she couldn't change and wouldn't matter for decades wasn't her style. Visha gave her a goodbye hug. Her hands remained on Tanya's shoulders when she pulled away. Then closer again for round two, she assumed, up until she felt something soft against her forehead. "Visha!" Tanya jerked back a bit, hand going to cover where her lips had been. "Did you just?" "What?" she asked. "We're both girls. I was trying to kiss the bruise inside your head, okay?" Visha laughed at her childish gesture. Tanya was still too surprised to do the same. Nobody wanted to respect her boundaries that day, she gathered. "You didn't like it?" Visha asked, a little pout following the question. "I was just shocked," Tanya assured. "Same as if you'd randomly touched my forehead with your elbow." "You say very weird things, sometimes," Visha said, rolling her eyes. "Goodbye." "Thanks," Tanya said. On a whim, she retaliated with a peck to Visha's cheek. She gasped and slapped her hand over it, same as Tanya had. "See?" Tanya said triumphantly. "I actually did use to play around with people, you know." "Well, I'm glad to hear you weren't plotting out your life when you were a toddler, I guess," Visha retorted. She gave one final wipe to her cheek. That was for you, Daisuke, Tanya thought, hand turning the knob on the door. She looked back a final time when she went to take her leave. "Bye, then." 
 xXx 
Every day since last Wednesday, the end to Erich von Lehrgen's day had been signaled by the scritch his pen made as it traveled its way along his calendar book from one corner of the date to the opposite. Every day except yesterday. It was Friday, just past lunch, when he realized he'd forgotten to draw a line through Thursday to prove he'd made it to the end of the day. This last week he'd had a constant refrain repeating in his mind, a reminder telling him he only needed to make it through to the end of the evening, nothing more. Tentatively, he flipped the page to the next day, an open bare-white expanse of future neatly divided into empty lines. Saturday, besides coming into the office, he had no specific plans. Sunday he wouldn't either, that was a given, it was really Monday he was after, a glimpse of what would happen; not what was, not what had. Another page turned. His fingers found the edge of the notebook the third time, to make Sunday disappear with the same crisp crackle of paper that Saturday had. Monday never came. Stark, bold black blocks stamped in the upper corner caught his eye, the number fourteen, February printed in smaller lettering beneath it. For thirty-eight years, the arbitrary date had meant nothing to him. Less than nothing. At best, it was a day to feel a bit superior to everyone making a fuss over it. And yet he couldn't turn the page, the date swam in his vision even when he closed his eyes, writ large across everything so as to make it obvious there was nothing filling the time below it. Nothing, nothing, nothing, there was nothing, nothing but- The shrill call of his telephone cut through because nobody's time had paused but his. They all had plans this weekend and wanted to get work out of the way and couldn't wait for him. He picked the offending object up. "What." "You - umm - sorry," Sauer stuttered on the other end. "You're best off getting outside to have a smoke. Or two." The strange advice piqued Erich's interest. "Why?" "Just…trust me." "What are you doing Sunday?" he asked, recalling that Ernst refused to make plans for Valentine's Day so as not to give any one girl ideas. "Given up on women, have we?" Ernst joked. "Just so you know, I haven't." Erich could hear the sympathetic tone underlying the playful words. But it was too soon. Much, much too soon. It would be months before he could laugh at the joke, it felt like. "Sauer," he snapped. "Shut up." "I'm free on Sunday," Ernst hastened to say, sounding repentant. "But I don't want to go to a museum or something, alright?" "Christ, you're the one making it sound like a fucking date, you know." Erich got a cigarette to take the edge off. "I was going to say hiking. Out along Wannsee, maybe." "It's going to be co-old," the complaint came. "Well, it's a good thing you aren't a girl, then. Do I need to have you transferred out of the office to toughen you back up?" "You can't do that," Ernst said, laughing a bit. "Who else is going to tell you you've got about five minutes until Degurechaff gets up there and you need to be gone?" "What's she up to?" Erich groaned. "So, it turns out she's been racking up promises she owes the typists and all the other girls to go out and have drinks with them sometime," Ernst began. Erich settled in. Year after year, they discussed getting Ernst to make his reports more concise and to-the-point. And year after year, for every modest reduction he made in the words he scrawled messily onto the page, too many to make each one legible, the unused ink converted to double the amount of air by some arcane alchemy and spilled out of Ernst's lungs when he wanted to tell a story. More likely than not, Tanya herself would be there before Ernst got to the part about why she needed to be avoided. Through several tangents, then in and out of Ernst's commentary on his relationship with each woman and how he'd come to learn this or that from them, Erich picked out the thread of what he needed to know. It was something he felt good at for a change, having too much information and figuring out what it was supposed to mean to him. The single women were going out after work to go hunting around bars in advance of Valentine's Day. Tanya's dues were being called in. Predictably, she had no interest in going and had given her regrets, then blamed Erich for needing her for something that evening. She was probably going to come demand his participation in the lie about her being busy, just as soon as she was done handing out copies of a report she'd made to the people that needed them. As to why Erich needed to be gone before she found him, the answer was simple: Ernst thought Tanya should go, and Erich shouldn't lie for her. Ernst had an idea. The details on his run-in with Tanya at the cafe that sparked the plot were sketchy, but Ernst was adamant. And very proud of himself. All was fair in love and war, especially when the former could prevent the latter. People changed when they fell in love. Erich knew a group of the younger men at the office always figured out where the girls went and crashed the party. Erich didn't know, but strongly suspected, that the type interested in taking the easy route and following girls around as a group wouldn't be looking for someone like Tanya, in the vanishingly-unlikely chance she was looking for someone like them. "Not just women then?" Ernst sighed, exasperated that Erich wasn't as enthusiastic about the plan as he was. "Have you given up on life entirely?" "No," Erich said. "No. Just, Tanya helped me feel better about things. It feels wrong to turn around and try to mess with her life." "How was she any help?" Ernst asked, suspicious. For good reason. "It's…hard to explain," Erich replied. For all the time he'd put into figuring out what made her tick, Tanya could still surprise him as often as not. An hour after their conversation last week she'd passed by his office and just stood there looking at him until he'd looked back at her. Checking on him out of care, assessing him for further weakness, neither fit, really, with the unplaceable sentiment on her face. "Thanks again," he'd said after a second of silence. "I feel a bit like myself again already. Or a new person. Maybe both." She'd stood there some more, saying nothing. She'd smiled, only smiled, some incomprehensible smile that only she knew the answer to. A smile like she was some mythological chimera, a bit pulled from more emotions than he could name. A touch of anger, a touch of sadness, a touch of joy, there was pain and relief and blame and gratefulness all at once hidden in her lips, her eyes, the quick flare of her nostrils belying a soft brow. "I know the feeling," was all she'd finally said before taking her leave, ending things as mysteriously as they'd begun. Saturday he'd felt well enough to cook. Sunday he'd lain in the bath with her words in his mind and for the first time not Elise's, thinking how they applied so well even to how he'd treated Tanya. He'd spent the war searching in vain for a way to both reap the benefits of child soldiers, and one in particular, without having to suffer any consequences. He'd failed at both. He'd lain there so long he'd wished there was a way to keep the bath water hot, so he could pretend it had been a bit of sweat he'd wiped off his face once he'd let go - he didn't have to be the same as that person anymore; didn't have to make the same mistakes. He'd come into work on Monday determined to make a new start of it, including with Tanya. In fairness, he had to let go of her past, too. Not so much he ignored it was there, more like that the girl she'd been years ago was some overbearing parent that had borne the woman Tanya was now. Someone who had shaped her, still suggested to her, but no longer controlled her, not completely. Like he'd predicted, Tanya came calling before Ernst was done. Erich looked at her as he hung up, someone with her whole life ahead of her to find what she wanted and whom, yet so eager not to take advantage of it. "I need a favor," she announced. "Alma's insisting I come out tonight. If she asks would you tell her I can't?" "Going out won't kill you," he said. "You know what it'll look like,' she argued back. "I don't want to give the impression I'm…available." He chuckled a bit and glanced at her outfit. That had unavailable written all over it, all on its own. Not that her general attitude towards people needed any help getting that point across. "You owe me," she continued. "I do," he agreed. He nodded to himself, mind made up. "It'll be good for both of us to go out and pretend we're normal. I promise I'll scare anyone off you want me to. And you can do the same for me. I already have plans with Ernst on Sunday." "You sure that's what you want?" she asked, looking and sounding wholly betrayed. "It's too soon for anything else, I think," he sighed. "Fine," she muttered. "Tonight it is, I guess." Once he stepped foot into the bar, he regretted coming. The floor was a bit sticky, it was loud, everyone else looked young and happy. He unbuttoned his jacket and put it over his arm. Being there felt like he was breaching some kind of decorum. "What the hell are you doing here?" Alma greeted him, saying aloud what he was wondering himself. His chin jerked towards a platinum blonde bob sullenly following the crowd to get a beer. "She was prepared to be very stubborn about not wanting to attend," he shrugged. Alma rolled her eyes and went to join the other women. Erich pushed his way to the front of the male half of their group, all bunched together on one side until someone got brave enough to go chat across the lines. He seated himself at a barstool. He had no interest in socializing, only sitting there, and drinking beer, and checking on Tanya every once in a while to make sure whatever she was doing to scare unwanted visitors off didn't involve physical injury. One cheap, watery beer followed another, then another, and most of the way through his third drink he registered someone had taken up residence next to him. He turned to see that the stool to his right was now occupied by a woman. Mousy brown hair chopped into a messy bob, on the petite side, dressed smartly and fashionably, five or ten years younger than him. She was pretty in a modern sort of way, he supposed. "Alma said I should introduce myself," she said, giving him a smile. Erich groaned to himself. Ernst must have said something to her. "I'm the newest typist. Charlotte." "I'm-,""I know who you are," she interrupted. She pointed at the jacket hanging off his stool. "Only one with gold on your collar but not gray on your head." "Oh, they're there," he laughed, fingers brushing self-consciously through his hair. "But not so many more than since the war ended, by my count." "You count?" she laughed back. "How vain." "Like you don't," he said. He motioned for another round for himself, along with a beer for his companion. The time passed fast, talking to someone new, with plenty of easy ground to cover. Where they grew up, what their jobs had been before this, exchanging basic office gossip. Charlotte was easy to talk to, and not uninteresting. He learned she'd done the same job at the police headquarters until recently. On the weekends, for extra money, she worked at one of the city's better-known clubs. He wondered how much Ernst must have told Alma, wondered if this was his chance to go be stupid for a night, and in the middle of wondering whether it was really alright for a general to get dragged around a club by a typist, he heard two taps on the floor behind him, loud enough to make it over the music. "Oh," Tanya said when he turned, two pool sticks held in front of her. "Am I interrupting something?" There was an emphasis she put on the last two words that meant something. Maybe she knew she was and was getting revenge on him for making her come out. Maybe she didn't and was offering to leave if he said yes. "N-no," he said quickly, deciding in a flash. The cheap sort of way Charlotte would make him feel good wasn't what he needed. What he was really missing was someone who would let him shut the world out and not expect him to be capable of facing every single item on that daunting list of duties and responsibilities and worries that piled on him day after day. Charlotte wasn't that. She was much too impressed by him. "Just being friendly," he went on. "Good," Tanya said, handing him a stick. "You're free then. I've already beat everyone else, but I hear you're the best of the lot." "I am," he replied, confident in that fact, before following her over towards the billiards tables.He ordered another drink, chalked his cue stick, then agreed to the typical count of three hundred for a win, a beer hanging in the balance as the prize. Tanya insisted that he be the one to break, which was a mistake on her part, so he happily took her up on it. Her overconfidence would be her downfall. Mages always thought they had the advantage. In a sense they were right, but the superb aim their ability gave them made them overly reliant on that skill. Against an amateur player, that was enough to win handily. Put them up against an opponent who knew a thing or two about how to strategize, and suddenly they were helpless. Erich leaned in to begin the match. He'd take it easy so he didn't embarrass her too badly. He made his way around the table at a leisurely pace, taking a few sips of beer in between each strike, until finally, over fifty points in his pocket, he missed a shot and the table was turned over to Tanya. Four turns later, he was ready to stomp his feet in frustration. She had no right to be so good at this. He leaned down to line his next shot up and wondered if he was going to lose the title he'd held for years as the best player in the office. He was winning, but barely. And maybe wouldn't be soon, given that he was getting so distracted he'd just missed again. Unlike every other mage he'd ever played, Tanya wasted no time making fancy, grand trick shots, but took the same cautious, incremental approach that serious players eventually learned was best. He couldn't call it beginner's luck, and that was the confusing part - given her recalcitrance about enjoying the nightlife, Erich had a hard time imagining she frequented bars in her spare time. Peeved she'd found something else to beat them all at, he put his beer down to concentrate. A half hour later, he broke three hundred, her tailing some thirty-odd points behind. His sixth drink, savored slowly while watching her stew in defeat, tasted much better than his recollection of the previous five. "You're good," he offered, the intense spike of satisfaction he'd gotten from besting her making him feel a magnanimous victor. "Where'd you learn to play so well?" "Courtesy of the Weiss brothers," Tanya replied. He nodded. "Any of the other ones mages?" "One," she said. "And two of his sisters." "Hell of a bloodline," Erich muttered. "You know, even counting my extended family, I don't think we've got a single drop of mana in the family tree." "Would you want it?" she asked, an eyebrow raised. He considered her for a moment, in all her erstwhile glory, sitting to his right at a bar, sipping on a beer, happy in a calmer way than he associated the wide smile he used to see out of her. It was worth a picture to replace that, only he didn't have a camera. "Personally?" he said, deciding there was no reason to offend. "I'm not going to say I don't still find it all a little strange you all can do what you do. But not so much in a bad way. I don't mind the idea." He tipped his head back and finished the last of his beer. "Now, out where I grew up, deep in the countryside?" he shrugged and gave a laugh, not able to avoid a small jibe. "You'd probably find more than one person who'd try to exorcize you out there." Tanya snorted. "I'd love to see them try. Honestly." "Alright, well, even I don't know the next time I'll be out that way," he said. He was sure she could eliminate their citizens that disliked magic in a more Tarwinian fashion that he was comfortable with when it came to moving progress forward. "It's a long trip and no one much to visit anymore." "Speaking of trips," Tanya said. "I hear you're going on one at the end of the month." He sighed. For the same old reasons, he'd been avoiding telling her about it. He should trust her a little more, he told himself. It took a couple of times repeating it to sound convincing. He was going to Londinium along with the diplomatic service. They'd meet Zettour there. After all the trouble they'd let the Polaskans cause, everyone was ready to talk concessions. "We're asking for orbs back, aren't we?" Tanya asked, flat and unhappy that he'd kept it from her. "Yes, but…but it doesn't mean anything for you yet. It doesn't have to." "I know," she replied, looking into her glass instead of at him. "Still." The news agitated her, he could see, the way she shifted in her seat like it had suddenly become uncomfortable, how her fingers started drumming on the counter. She didn't go skipping around the room whooping with excitement. That was victory enough. Still, the warm glow of camaraderie fizzled out and faded, leaving an empty gap in between. In the end, until she came up with another answer, the two of them wanted very different things. Spell broken, he turned to throw some last bills on the counter. "Everyone else will find out, eventually, you know," she said, looking so superior he'd have thought she'd won their game. "That it was just non-military orbs. What then?" "Then it will be too late," he hissed, hand tightening on the empty glass of his still on the counter. "Nobody's going to war over it, if that's what you're thinking. We're an industrial economy. Not having civilian orbs at cost is ruining us. By the time everyone figures out we have military-grade orbs because of some mistake, it'll have been long enough it'll be easier to sell letting it carry on than summoning the force to stop us." She accepted the explanation. With many sighs and glances to the side, like she didn't want to believe it was true. "Why do you have to go, anyway?" Tanya asked, oblivious to how getting on the subject had soured his mood. "Romel feels my motives seem less suspect than other representatives of the Army," he told her. A spot of humor returned. They'd come far enough he could chide her over her flaws. "Although, seeing how I'm being corrupted by you, I'm not sure why." She laughed, because he knew she thought she'd convinced him to give her a chance, and now he was helping her climb her way back into power. Maybe he was, but he thought he'd convinced her to give him a chance, too. She just didn't know it. "Come on," he said, eager to leave the whole ordeal and start over again on Monday. "Let's go find the taxis." "I'm not that far," she deferred. "I can walk." Of course she could. She'd seen worse, far worse, than Berun on a Friday night. In the company of her battalion and orb. One hand went to her shoulder to push her gently in the direction of the door. "No leaving bars and walking home at night, alone, through the middle of the city," he lectured. "That's a rule. You aren't invincible." She didn't accept the ultimatum graciously. Had he not paid for the fare, she wouldn't have gotten in, he thought, not with all her grumbling. When she was gone, a cigarette he'd been putting off came out of his pocket, and he went around the alley to relax in peace for a few cold and quiet minutes. Part of him wished Charlotte were there standing next to him, about to take his hand and show him a few exciting new things about the city and what he had yet to experience of it. The larger part of him was glad she wasn't there. Choosing to be alone for the first time in two weeks made him feel better than she ever could. Before he could doubt himself, Erich started walking, got away from the bars and people and taxis quick as he could, violating his own rule, because it wasn't for people like him, tall and uniformed and male. Down Potsdammerstraße, down Hauptstraße, before it became Rheinstraße, his pace slowed as he approached the corner he would turn on to get to Elise's. Since he'd last seen her, she'd been frozen in time. He'd thought about their past more than was healthy; her present, her future, those hadn't existed. He hadn't been able to face thinking she was moving on without him. Once again, he was grateful to the possibly-vengeful woman who'd shooed Charlotte away so he couldn't have her. For that, he could walk past Elise's street and acknowledge she still existed, right there, but he wasn't going to see her. He was choosing to be alone. Thanks to that, though he'd probably always miss the little world he and Elise had created where difficult things didn't exist for a time, this one, at least, didn't scare him so much. He could do it.